CNN — The US is home to more immigrants than any other country – more than 45 million people, according to the latest Census estimates. That’s 13.6% of the US population, about the same as it was a century ago. But over the years, we’ve seen significant shifts in where immigrants to the US come from, and where they end up once they get here. Here’s a look at these key immigration trends and how they’ve changed over time. For decades one country has topped the list Mexicans represent the largest group of immigrants living in the United States. That’s been true since 1980, according to the nonpartisan Migration Policy Institute. And the Mexico-US route is the largest migration corridor in the world. But the total number of Mexican immigrants living in the US has been on the decline for more than a decade. An estimated 10.7 million Mexican immigrants lived in the US in 2021, roughly 1 million fewer than the number a decade earlier. Meanwhile, immigration from other countries, including India and China, has been on the rise, according to MPI. As one expert told CNN last year, the range of reasons why people move to the US from different parts of the world is as varied as the list of countries these immigrants once called home. Some are seeking economic opportunities. Others are fleeing violence, persecution or climate disasters. And others are hoping to reunite with family members who are already here. According to an analysis of Census data from MPI, the top 10 countries of origin for immigrants in the United States are all in Latin America and Asia. These statistics include both immigrants who came to the United States legally and those who are living in the country without authorization. Looking only at the population of undocumented immigrants living in the United States, the list of the top countries of origin shifts slightly. A Department of Homeland Security report in 2021 estimated that the top six countries of origin for undocumented immigrants were Mexico, El Salvador, Guatemala, India, Honduras and China. But most immigrants who live in the United States aren’t undocumented. The Pew Research Center’s latest estimates indicate about 10.5 million undocumented immigrants live in the United States. That means the vast majority of foreign-born people living in the United States (77%) are here legally. Rewinding to the 1960s reveals a different picture Mexico hasn’t always topped the list. Back in 1960, for example, the portrait of US immigrants was dramatically different. At that time, according to the Migration Policy Institute, the largest group of immigrants were Italians, followed by Germans and Canadians. Why did things change so significantly? For decades a national original quota system passed by Congress in 1924 favored migrants from northern and western Europe and excluded Asians. In 1965, the Immigration and Nationality Act created a new system that prioritized highly skilled immigrants and those who already had family living in the country. That paved the way for millions of non-European immigrants to come to the United States. “It fundamentally changed the demographics of the country,” Pawan Dhingra, a professor of American Studies at Amherst College, told CNN in 2020. For decades, the immigrant population in the United States had been decreasing. But the new law also sparked a dramatic increase in immigration in the decades that followed, fueled largely by family reunification. In 1965, 9.6 million immigrants living in the US comprised just 5% of the population, according to the Migration Policy Institute. Now more than 45 million immigrants make up nearly 14% of the country. While the total number of immigrants has reached a historic high, immigrants made up a greater share of the US population in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Most states have seen their immigrant populations grow The makeup of who’s coming to the United States isn’t the only thing that’s changed. There have also been notable shifts in where those immigrants end up. Arriving immigrants often settled in historic immigrant gateways in major metropolitan areas, such as New York City, Chicago and Boston. But for more than a decade, a much broader swath of locations in the United States have become gateways that are home to growing immigrant populations. Today, California, Texas, Florida, New York and New Jersey are home to the largest numbers of immigrants. But looking at the total number of immigrants in each state only tells part of the story. Some states have larger numbers of immigrants relative to their total populations. In Hawaii, for example, immigrants make up nearly 19% of the state’s population. A recent study by the Bush Institute found that many immigrants eventually move from traditional gateway cities to other areas of the country. “Immigrants making secondary moves within the United States are disproportionately choosing the same places as native-born people – metros with relatively affordable housing and growth-friendly business and tax policies,” the study says. “Once there, they gravitate toward fast-growing suburban counties.” For many years, the majority of immigrants lived in the Northeast and Midwest. But now, according to the Pew Research Center’s latest analysis, about two-thirds of immigrants live in the West and South. And in recent years, some states have seen their immigrant populations grow at a faster rate. As the Bush Institute study notes, job opportunities, affordable housing, family connections and immigrant-friendly policies are among the factors that immigrants consider when deciding where to move. If current trends continue, experts say in the coming years we could see immigrants make up a historically high share of the US population. But with geopolitical turmoil around the world and ongoing divisive debates over immigration in Washington, it’s hard to predict where future groups of immigrants may come from, or how quickly that milestone will be reached.
CNN — More than 7,500 migrants from Cuba, Nicaragua and Haiti have been approved to come to the United States under a program set up by the Biden administration earlier this month, which administration officials have cited as contributing to a drop in border crossings, according to data obtained by CNN. President Joe Biden announced the program for the three nationalities from the White House this month, describing it as a way for migrants who are fleeing poor conditions at home to migrate to the US from where they are instead of taking the treacherous journey north. Those who don’t apply for the program, though, can be sent back to Mexico if they try to cross the US-Mexico border, marking a departure from previous protocol. The announcement received mixed reviews from Democratic allies and immigrant advocates who welcomed a pathway for migrants to come to the US but criticized the expansion of Title 42 – a Covid-era restriction that allows authorities to turn back migrants – to include additional nationalities. So far, the data indicates that migrants are using the program to migrate to the US instead of unlawfully crossing the US-Mexico border, but the number of people using the program remains low given the hundreds of thousands of migrants moving across the Western Hemisphere. Data obtained by CNN reveals that more than 800 Nicaraguans have been approved, about 2,000 Haitians have been approved and more than 4,700 Cubans have been approved for travel. Applications are pending across all nationalities, and it appears most people are applying from their native country. Since January 5, when the program was announced, more than 1,700 individuals have arrived in the United States under this process from Cuba, Nicaragua and Haiti, according to a Homeland Security official. The parole program announced this month builds on a similar effort launched last fall for Venezuelans. Since October, more than 26,000 Venezuelans have been approved to come to the US, according to the data. Up to 30,000 migrants from Haiti, Venezuela, Nicaragua and Cuba are allowed into the US per month through the program. To qualify, migrants have to have a sponsor in the US and undergo screening and vetting. Encounters with migrants from the four nationalities declined 97% in January compared to December, officials told reporters this week, citing preliminary numbers. Border numbers often fluctuate depending on circumstances in the Western Hemisphere, so it’s unclear how long the trend will hold. But officials cited new measures, like opening a pathway for migrants to apply to come to the United States, and coordination with Mexico as contributing to the decline in encounters. This week, Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton, along with 19 other states, argued in a lawsuit that the administration didn’t go through the notice and comment rulemaking process before instituting the rule. As a result, the states are asking the court to block the program.
New York and other cities complain they are overwhelmed by buses of migrants being sent from the border.
In the absence of action by Congress, court decisions are setting US border policy. But the elements are all interrelated. I talked to CNN’s Priscilla Alvarez to get her perspective as a White House reporter with a deep background in reporting on all aspects of the larger immigration story. Our conversation, conducted by email, is below. And don’t miss her story that published Tuesday: Federal judge blocks Biden’s controversial asylum policy in a major blow to administration. Suing Texas over floating barriers WOLF: The US government is suing Texas to remove floating barriers from the Rio Grande. But it’s just the latest in a series of escalating measures Texas has undertaken on its own to keep migrants out of the country. What is the state of play at the border? ALVAREZ: The handling of the US-Mexico border has long been a point of contention between President (Joe) Biden and Texas Gov. Greg Abbott, who’s argued that the administration hasn’t done enough to enforce the border. As an affront to Biden’s border policies, Abbott has transported migrants to Democratic-led cities without coordinating with city officials, deployed more personnel to the Texas-Mexico border, and earlier this month, installed buoys in the Rio Grande. Texas Department of Public Safety (DPS) highway patrol troopers look over the Rio Grande as migrants walk by a string of buoys placed on the water along the Rio Grande border with Mexico in Eagle Pass, Texas, on July 15, 2023, to prevent illegal immigration entry to the US. The buoy installation is part of an operation Texas is pursuing to secure its borders, but activists and some legislators say Governor Greg Abbott is exceeding his authority. (Photo by SUZANNE CORDEIRO / AFP) (Photo by SUZANNE CORDEIRO/AFP via Getty Images) Suzanne Cordeiro/AFP/Getty Images video See floating barrier to deter migrant crossings along US-Mexico border Border agents have historically worked closely with the Texas National Guard and the Texas Department of Public Safety. But the latest steps taken by the state have made day-to-day operations more difficult. DPS made certain portions of the Texas-Mexico border more difficult to access, marking a departure from the coordination that previously existed between law enforcement. Agents on the ground have also sent regular reports to US Customs and Border Protection headquarters about what they’ve observed as Abbott’s operation has been underway, a Homeland Security official told me. But disturbing images of migrants with injuries and troubling reports of Texas troops pushing migrants back to Mexico forced the Biden’s administration hands. Last week, the Justice Department said it’s assessing the situation along the Texas-Mexico border and on Monday, the DOJ filed a lawsuit on a separate, though related matter: the installation of a floating barrier. The lawsuit says Texas didn’t seek authorization before placing the floating barrier in the Rio Grande and poses a threat to navigation. That court battle could take months to play out. But in the interim, it could fuel tensions between agents and troops on the ground and further escalate the feud between Biden and Abbott. Why a predicted migrant surge didn’t happen WOLF: You’ve written about how an expected surge of migrants after the end of a Covid-era policy known as Title 42 never materialized. What happened? ALVAREZ: Let’s provide some context first. Migration often ebbs and flows. But the Biden administration has had to grapple with unprecedented mass movement of people in the Western hemisphere, which is in part the outcome of the coronavirus pandemic decimating conditions in the region. exp border pregnant migrants flores pkg 072204pseg1 cnn us _00005001.png video Pregnant migrants: Texas National Guard denied us water The administration relied on a public health authority, known as Title 42, to quickly expel migrants back to Mexico or their origin countries. That authority had been invoked under former President (Donald) Trump and used to turn away migrants, including asylum-seekers, at the US-Mexico border on public health grounds. In the days leading up to the expiration of Title 42, thousands of migrants tried to cross the US southern border, knowing that they could face tougher penalties after the end of the authority including bans on reentry to the United States. And that’s indeed been the case. Increased deportations and tougher policies, paired with other, new legal pathways to the United States, appear to have driven down the number of people attempting to unlawfully cross the US-Mexico border. In June, for example, US Border Patrol arrested nearly 100,000 migrants along the US southern border, marking a decrease from May and marking the lowest monthly border encounters since February 2021, according to US Customs and Border Protection data. Busing migrants to far-flung US cities WOLF: Far from the border in Texas, New York Mayor Eric Adams, after earlier welcoming migrants bused to his city, has said with increasing urgency that the city is full. Migrants are now also being bused to Los Angeles. What’s the latest on the busing angle? ALVAREZ: The busing is still happening. Since last year, Texas has bused more than 27,000 migrants to six cities, according to Abbott’s office. The cities include Washington, DC, New York City, Chicago, Philadelphia, Denver and Los Angeles. One of the main issues with the transport of migrants to these cities that officials often raise alarm about is the lack of coordination. The governor’s office doesn’t generally notify cities that migrants are being sent there, leaving border NGOs (nongovernmental organizations) to try to fill the information void. It’s important to note, though, that migrants who are released from government custody have been vetted and processed by federal authorities and are released as they go through their immigration court proceedings. An immigration judge ultimately decides whether a migrant has grounds to stay in the United States or be ordered removed. Who is actually trying to solve this problem? WOLF: All of these things are related – the efforts by Texas to create its own border policy, the difficulty New York and cities are facing as they deal with an influx of migrants … everything feeds from the lack of more comprehensive immigration reform. Is there any movement in Congress toward dealing with all of this in a comprehensive way? exp Mexico bodies cnni world_00003001.png video 28 bodies found near U.S. border ALVAREZ: Bills addressing the immigration system have been introduced by both parties. Republican Rep. Tony Gonzales of Texas, for example, has introduced legislation that addresses work visa programs, among other parts of the system. But it’s such a divisive issue that legislation struggles to move forward. Both parties are so far apart on the issue that even though Democrats and Republicans acknowledge the US immigration system is broken, they can’t agree on how to fix it. Without comprehensive reform, the federal government is left to implementing a patchwork of policies and then playing defense when lawsuits are filed against them, often resulting in policy whiplash.
CNN — Immigration has long been a political football in the United States. But If you’re wondering why America’s labor shortage persists nearly three years into the Covid pandemic, it’s in part because America doesn’t have enough immigrants. Immigrants are vital to the US economy and fill thousands of US jobs – jobs many Americas don’t want to do. In 2020, the processing of legal immigrant worker visas stopped and only picked up towards the end of 2021. And by the end of last year there were close to 2 million fewer working-age immigrants in the United States than there would have been if pre-pandemic immigration continued unchanged, according to new research from the University of California, Davis. “Part of the reason why there are so many vacancies and unfilled jobs in the US is that we are missing a whole lot of immigrants who regularly were coming before Covid,” said Giovanni Peri, the author of the UC Davis research and Director of the Global Migration Center. The immigration debate has been reignited because of a surge at the US-Mexico Border. In March 2020, President Trump invoked Title 42 – a law enacted during the pandemic to prevent the spread of Covid – that has kept migrants and would-be asylum seekers out of the country. Asylum seekers are legally able to work in the United States while they await their asylum cases. During that waiting period, those seeking asylum can apply for work permits — a process that usually takes 180 days before they are authorized. But the decrease in legal immigration over the last two years has hurt American businesses. Especially in industries that require lower skilled labor: construction, agriculture, and hospitality. “We don’t make up the losses unless we really change immigration laws and we allow more people every year to come in,” said Peri. “The way in which we are catching up is that we are processing visas at the speed that it was done before Covid. So for a while there will be this gap.” The lack of available workers has pushed wages higher – fueling higher inflation. Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell said that in addition to an aging workforce there is a lack of foreign labor contributing to labor shortages. “The combination of a plunge in net immigration and a surge in deaths during the pandemic probably accounts for about one-and-a-half million missing workers,” said Jerome Powell, Chairman of the Federal Reserve last month. The ‘big impact’ The biggest impact comes to industries like construction, agriculture, and especially hospitality – which are reliant on immigrant workers. Those types of industries had higher rates of unfilled jobs last year – adding to existing labor shortages, according to UC Davis research. There are currently 10.3 million open jobs in the US – 377,000 in construction and 1.6 million in hospitality. That number has been on the rise in recent months. “The hospitality [sector] was employing a very large number of immigrants, 30%- 40% of the labor force in that sector was foreign born. And so you’re missing a lot of them, and potentially that is a big impact,” said Peri. A group of migrants are waiting on the US side of the Rio Grande as the Texas National Guard blocked access to parts of the border with barbed wire and vehicles, as seen from Ciudad Juarez, Mexico on December 20, 2022. David von Blohn/CNN This is what the crisis along the US border looks like The restaurant industry has borne the brunt of the downturn in immigration. Slower service, restaurants closed for lunch, higher prices – are all a result of labor shortages. And the restaurant industry is on track to grow by 14% in the next decade – while the US-born workforce is expected to grow by just 10%, according to the National Restaurant Association. There will be more restaurant jobs than the US workforce can fill. Sixty percent of restaurant operators are facing staffing shortages limiting their operating capacity, according to National Restaurant Association. But a new piece of legislation, “The Essential Workers for Economic Advancement Act,” was introduced in the House earlier this year. The law would create a new visa program for workers in industries like hospitality. “Immigration reform is an economic necessity for the restaurant industry,” said Sean Kennedy, EVP of Public Affairs at the National Restaurant Association. “Allowing more legal immigration would be a win-win for employers in desperate need of employees and individuals seeking new opportunity.” “Skilled” workers About 1 million of the 2 million potential immigrants who were lost during the pandemic were college educated, according to the UC Davis research. These workers would be considered “high-skilled workers,” potentially coming to the US on H-1B specialty visas. Those high-skilled workers are job multipliers. For each high-skilled worker – 2.5 additional jobs are created, according to a report by UC Berkeley. “High skilled immigration is incredibly important,” said Adam Ozimek, chief economist at the Economic Innovation Group. “We shouldn’t think of it as something that addresses short-term shortages – although it can help – but something that is really important for long run: innovation, productivity, growth, and health of the economy.” Earlier this month, the American Farm Bureau Federation, along with 350 other agricultural groups, called on the Senate to pass an agricultural reform bill already passed by the House to address the farm labor crisis. Skilled foreign farm workers are the backbone of US agriculture and are traditionally in the US on H-2A seasonal visas, which saw its highest ever utilization rate this year, according to the Farm Bureau. But many in agriculture says it’s not enough and they still can’t find workers. “The farm labor crisis is hindering production and contributing to food price inflation. We must address this workforce crisis threatening farms across the United States so our producers can continue to feed, clothe, and fuel our nation,” the letter to Senate leadership read. But, according to the Department of Labor, 317,000 temporary H-2A jobs were certified last year, more than six times the number in 2005. But only 80% of those jobs certified resulted in a visa.
CNN — A new surge of migrants at the US-Mexico border is overwhelming already-stretched resources and prompting urgent talks with Mexican officials as December border crossings reached a record monthly high. Border authorities encountered more than 225,000 migrants along the US-Mexico border this month, marking the highest monthly total recorded since 2000, according to preliminary Homeland Security statistics shared with CNN. Over the course of the month, authorities dealt with more than 10,000 migrants crossing daily until more recently, when the numbers began to drop. More than 11,700 migrant children are also in federal government custody, according to data released jointly by the Department of Health and Human Services and the Department of Homeland Security. The number of migrant children in Health and Human Services custody has jumped 6.5% since December 1, prompting the department to issue a news release Friday saying additional capacity is “urgently needed to manage the increasing numbers of unaccompanied children” arriving at the US southern border. Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas is heading to Eagle Pass, Texas, along the southern border January 8 for an “operational visit” regarding immigration enforcement efforts, the Department of Homeland Security said Friday. He will meet with officials with Customs and Border Protection as well as US Border Patrol and local officials. Since last year, Texas Republican Gov. Greg Abbott has bused more than 92,000 migrants to cities across the country, according to his office. Those cities include Los Angeles, Denver, Chicago, Philadelphia, New York City and Washington, DC – all of which are led by Democratic mayors. Even US cities far from the Mexican border are reaching a breaking point trying to manage the influx of migrants, several mayors told CNN on Friday. “The international crisis that we are experiencing right now is being subsidized by local economies,” Chicago Mayor Brandon Johnson told “CNN This Morning” Friday. Greg Abbott, governor of Texas, speaks during a news conference in Dallas, Texas, US, on Tuesday, Aug. 23, 2022. A massive rainstorm in North Texas drenched parts of the Dallas-Fort Worth area with more than a foot of water, swamping roadways, triggering flash flood warnings and killing at least one person in what experts call a once-in-200-years event. Photographer: Shelby Tauber/Bloomberg via Getty Images Shelby Tauber/Bloomberg/Getty Images Texas spends more than $12 million to bus migrants to Washington, DC, and New York “That is not sustainable, and that’s why we need Congress to actually have appropriations to make sure that what refugees from Ukraine receive, we have to ask … why aren’t those same support services being provided for individuals who are coming from the continent of Africa and Central and South America?” The shelter system for migrants in Chicago has reached capacity, the mayor said. And without a coordinated solution, the migrant crisis “is going to crush local economies,” Johnson said. Denver is expected to spend about 10% of its entire city budget on migrant shelter and aid next year, Mayor Mike Johnston said. New York City has received more than 161,000 migrants since 2022, and the influx will likely cost an estimated $12 billion over three years, Mayor Eric Adams said. “This national crisis is impacting – and it has the potential to destabilize – the financial obligations that we have in our cities,” Adams said. A member of the Texas National Guard is watching over the border between Mexico and the United States, aiming to prevent migrants from crossing on December 23, 2023. David Peinado/NurPhoto/Getty Images Texas sheriff says his agency lacks manpower to handle both the surge of migrants and local matters He said New York City might reach a “breaking point,” which could include forced cutbacks to school programs, the police department, trash pickup and resources for senior citizens. “Every agency and delivery of service in my city is going to be drastically impacted by the actions of picking up the tab of $5 billion this fiscal year, $12 billion of three years,” Adams said. Abbott’s office has defended Texas’ practice of busing migrants to other states, saying “the busing mission is providing much-needed relief to our overwhelmed border communities.” As for the federal government, the Biden administration has acknowledged some mayors’ requests to help alleviate the shelter crisis and streamline work authorization for eligible noncitizens. “President Biden is committed to addressing this problem, that’s why he submitted a supplemental funding request to Congress which includes additional resources to secure the border with more law enforcement, more grant funding for jurisdictions hosting migrants, and funding to accelerate the processing of work permits for eligible noncitizens,” a White House spokesperson said. DOJ says it will sue Texas over its new law The Department of Justice has threatened to sue Texas over its new immigration law in a letter Thursday, according to a copy of the letter obtained by CNN. The threat marks the latest escalation between President Joe Biden and Republican Gov. Greg Abbott over the handling of the US-Mexico border. Earlier this month, Abbott signed Senate Bill 4 into law, giving local law enforcement the power to arrest migrants and empowering judges to remove migrants from the US. The measure is expected to take effect in March. Buoys placed by the state of Texas float on the Rio Grande international boundary between Mexico and the U.S. in Eagle Pass, Texas, on July 21, 2023. Omar Ornelas/El Paso Times/USA Today Network Federal appeals court says Texas’ floating barriers can remain in Rio Grande for now The White House slammed the new law, calling it “incredibly extreme.” In a letter to Abbott, the DOJ argued the measure is “preempted and violates the US Constitution” and risks interfering with the federal government’s ability to enforce immigration law. “Accordingly, the United States intends to file suit to enjoin the enforcement of SB 4 unless Texas agrees to refrain from enforcing the law,” the letter, signed by Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General Brian Boynton, states. “The United States is committed to both securing the border and ensuring the processing of noncitizens consistent with the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA). SB 4 is contrary to these goals.” Abbott slammed the Justice Department’s letter later Thursday and accused President Joe Biden of “destroying America.” “The Biden Admin. not only refuses to enforce current U.S. immigration laws, they now want to stop Texas from enforcing laws against illegal immigration,” Abbott said in a post on X. “I’ve never seen such hostility to the rule of law in America.” Thursday’s legal threat comes after the Justice Department sued Texas over its use of floating barriers in the Rio Grande. The threat also comes after Texas sued the Biden administration over allegations federal agents were cutting razor wire in Eagle Pass put up by Abbott’s border security initiative. Both lawsuits are still making their way through the courts. 7,000 arrests in a day mark a decrease Border authorities apprehended more than 7,000 migrants along the US-Mexico border on Wednesday, according to a Homeland Security official. Wednesday’s arrests are still lower than earlier this month – when daily apprehensions surpassed 10,000 – and reflects some relief for border authorities. There has been a “pretty significant reduction in border crossings” in recent days, a senior administration official said Wednesday. Going back is not an option, immigrants at the border say CNN For many migrant families at the southern US border, going back is not an option In early December, the seven-day average of daily encounters hovered around 9,600 – a jump from late November, when the average stood at 6,800. US and Mexican officials described high-level talks Wednesday as “productive” as Mexico moves to double down on immigration enforcement and crack down on human smugglers. About 2,000 border arrests Wednesday took place in the Del Rio Sector, according to a law enforcement source. The same source said total apprehensions Monday were about 2,000, a drop from the 3,000 daily average number of migrant apprehensions last week. The Del Rio Sector includes Eagle Pass, Texas, which had thousands of migrants waiting outside to be transported for immigration processing last week. Mexican officials will visit Washington Mexican and US officials will meet in Washington next month to discuss curbing the influx of migrants into the US, according to the US National Security Council. The visit will come after this week’s high-level US delegation visit to Mexico City, which included Secretary of State Antony Blinken and Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas. A National Security Council spokesperson called the trip “productive” and said Mexican President Andrés Manuel López Obrador “has taken significant new enforcement actions” when it comes to migration. Migrants walk in a line to a Border Patrol transport van at the US-Mexico border fence near Lukeville, Arizona, on December 24. Rebecca Noble/Reuters US officials describe ‘productive’ meeting with Mexico as Biden feels pressure over migrant crisis Mexican Secretary of Foreign Affairs Alicia Barcena told reporters the talks also covered the importance of the economic relationship between the US and Mexico, as well as the root causes of migration, such as poverty, inequality, violence and family reunification, according to a recording provided to CNN by Mexico’s foreign ministry. US officials said Mexico shared plans to crack down on migrant smugglers, which is contributing to the recent increase at the border. Mexico has also taken a leadership role on “conducting humane border management, including repatriations,” a US senior administration official said, and more repatriations were conducted this year than ever before. The US has historically leaned on Mexico to act as a buffer and stem the flow of migrants journeying to the US southern border. But Mexico, like the US, faces similar difficulties as the number of migrants crossing into its country overwhelms its limited resources. Many migrants coming from the Mexican side of the border are from Central and South America as well as the Caribbean, Cuba and Haiti. A migrant carries bags toward the US border fence from Ciudad Juarez, Mexico, on Wednesday. Christian Chavez/AP Immigration has been a political vulnerability for Biden, who has faced fierce criticism from Republicans and even some members of his own party for the situation at the US-Mexico border. US officials acknowledge more work needs to be done by both countries. “We continue to address the root causes and build on legal pathways that incentivize orderly migration and enforcement of our laws,” a National Security Council official said. The January meetings will “assess progress and decide what more can be done,” the National Security Council official said. This story has been updated with additional information. CNN’s Kevin Liptak and Antoine Sanfuentes contributed to this report.
Editor’s Note: Justin Gest (@_JustinGest) is an associate professor at George Mason University’s Schar School of Policy and Government. He is the author of “The New Minority: White Working Class Politics in an Age of Immigration and Inequality” and, with Anna Boucher, “Crossroads: Comparative Immigration Regimes in a World of Demographic Change.” The views expressed in this commentary are his own. View more opinion on CNN. CNN — During four years in office, President Donald Trump reduced immigration admissions in every way that American law makes possible without congressional approval – cutting refugee numbers, deporting law-abiding members of American citizens’ families and then finally halting all entry to the US amid the pandemic for a period before blocking the issuance of new green cards. In 2020, virtually zero migration was no longer just a thought experiment; it was, at least for a period of time, policy. Justin Gest Ron Aira/Photo by: Ron Aira/Creative Services/GMU As the US government now grapples with a backlog of asylum-seekers and immigrants at the southern border, a team of economists, demographers and I modeled what America would be like if those earlier policies were to continue hereafter. Commissioned by the bipartisan immigration advocacy group FWD.us, our independent research used the most recent US Census and economic data to project the outcomes of a variety of different policy scenarios – one that cuts immigration to zero as Trump effectively did in 2020; one that cuts immigration admissions in half; one that extends recent levels; one that increases recent levels by 50%; and one that doubles recent levels. The general trend in our modeling is clear: the more immigrants, the merrier. In short, if immigration remained at near-zero levels, within decades, the country could be older, smaller and poorer. But if the US government welcomed more newcomers, within decades, the country could be younger, more productive and richer. Immigrants are both a primary source of American workers and population growth. According to 2019 figures from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, even though almost 14% of the US population is foreign-born, 17.4% of the US labor force is foreign-born. And, according to 2017 data from Pew Research Center, while US-born fertility rates are about 56 births per 1000 women, US immigrant fertility rates are about 77 births per 1000 women. So when immigration admissions are cut to zero, our population ages faster and shrinks. And because the US relies heavily on immigrant labor and innovation, when admissions are cut to zero, Social Security quickly becomes insolvent and our productivity stagnates. Perhaps more importantly though, we find that even recent levels of legal immigration – the approximately 1 million people per year that the US has traditionally granted permanent residence over the last few decades – are not enough for the country to maintain historic rates of productivity. It is only through increased immigration that the United States can achieve a sustainable working-age population, economic growth and a solvent Social Security system. Of course, American society is not a factory. Immigrants bring with them different cultures, attitudes and preferences. And some of those differences do not sit well with parts of the population. Some Americans are already responding to current levels of demographic diversity with nativism and “America First” nationalism. However, this research demonstrates that more immigration is in the best interests of national survival. We should think of immigration policy not just as a humanitarian obligation or a legacy of our past, but actually as a way to secure the country’s future. Welcoming newcomers is as pro-America as it gets. According to our research, by 2060, the share of the population between 18 and 65 – working-age – is projected to be nearly 62% in the scenario that doubles the current annual number of immigrant admissions. If immigration is cut to zero, it would be less than 56%. While this difference may seem small, it significantly affects the balance between workers and the elderly – who are less likely to work or contribute to the tax base, and more likely to draw on government benefits and services. Where there were only 25 elderly persons per 100 working-age people in 2018, by 2060, we can expect nearly 50 elderly persons per 100 working-age people in the case of zero net migration, but only 30 in the scenario involving doubled admissions. The zero-immigration scenario predicts real GDP of only $32 trillion by 2060, more than 27% lower than if recent trends were to continue. Were Congress to maintain the current mix of visas but double annual admissions, the US would increase economic growth by over 40% relative to the scenario that extends 2018 baseline trends. Stay up to date... Sign up for our new newsletter.Join us on Twitter and Facebook Meanwhile, increased immigration is one way to sustain current expenses associated with Social Security payments. In 2018, Social Security payments accounted for about a quarter of all federal spending, and this share would stay the same if immigration admissions were doubled. However, if current trends were to continue, this share would rise to about 31% in 2060. And if immigration were cut to zero, Social Security payments would eventually consume 35% of the federal budget – squeezing other federal programs. The bottom line: policy matters. The choices Congress and the White House make today drive the demographic composition of our country and engineer our economic future. This puts the desperation of asylum seekers at the US southern border into a new perspective. No doubt, the US needs an orderly system of migration management. But the young and industrious newcomers yearning to stabilize their lives and secure their survival are actually critical to our nation’s survival, too.
CNN — The change in immigration policy that could most affect the US’ long-term economic growth is at risk of falling out of the debate as the congressional maneuvering over the volatile issue intensifies. With Republicans, under the shadow of former President Donald Trump, still mostly opposing all forms of immigration, and many Democrats narrowing their focus toward legalizing as many undocumented immigrants as possible, revisions to the nation’s system of legal immigration may lack a plausible pathway to congressional passage, many participants in the legislative discussions say. Yet immigration experts and economists across the ideological spectrum agree that increasing the future flow of legal immigrants will be essential to driving economic growth and maintaining a sustainable balance between the number of working-age people paying taxes and retired Americans drawing benefits through Social Security, Medicare and other entitlements for the elderly. That pressure is especially acute because the latest census data suggest the nation’s population may have grown more slowly from 2010 to 2020 than over any other 10-year span in American history – an ominous dynamic that’s received little attention from either party. “Without immigration it becomes increasingly impossible to sustain entitlements, much less a functioning health care system, or a local tax base in rural and suburban cities and communities across the country,” says Ali Noorani, president of the National Immigration Forum, a centrist immigration advocacy group. Douglas Holtz-Eakin, president of the center-right American Action Forum, echoes his warning. Given the slowdown in the growth of the working-age population, he says, “in the absence of immigration the US becomes Japan: We become smaller in size, older, less economically potent and less capable of projecting our values on our global stage.” After Trump sought to slash legal immigration through legislative and administrative action, the legislative proposals introduced last week by President Joe Biden and congressional Democrats would boost the number of new arrivals to a much greater extent than initial reactions to the bills recognized, according to a new analysis shared exclusively with CNN by Stuart Anderson, executive director of the National Foundation for American Policy, a public policy group that studies immigration. Legal immigration is really the orphan child in all of this. David Bier, immigration policy analyst, Cato Institute “The bill would end up significantly increasing the legal immigration level and that should have a significant benefit demographically,” Anderson told me. But those proposals could quickly fall out of the immigration debate if Democrats conclude that they have no chance of winning enough Republican support to pass a comprehensive bill – and instead narrow their efforts to legalizing big chunks of the undocumented population, such as young undocumented people brought to the US by their parents, through the budget “reconciliation” process, which requires only a majority vote in the Senate. “Legal immigration is really the orphan child in all of this,” says David Bier, an immigration policy analyst at the libertarian Cato Institute. That’s likely to change only if enough Senate Republicans are willing to support comprehensive legislation that addresses both the undocumented and legal immigration. And that remains a long shot, as the GOP’s electoral coalition in the Trump era has grown even more dependent on the voters most uneasy about immigration in particular and the nation’s growing racial and religious diversity in general. Earlier comprehensive efforts fizzled All of this year’s legislative calculations about immigration, as I wrote recently, are shaped by the failures of 2006 and 2013. Presidents George W. Bush and Barack Obama tried to pass comprehensive immigration bills that balanced legalization for the roughly 11 million undocumented immigrants – a Democratic priority – with tougher border enforcement – the top Republican goal – and changes in the legal immigration system – mostly a concern of the business community and a source of ambivalence, if not hostility, from organized labor. Both in 2006 and 2013, the Senate passed omnibus bills with bipartisan majorities (though with support from notably fewer Republicans the second time.) But each time the legislation died when the Republicans who controlled the House majority at the time refused to consider the bills. That legacy of failure largely explains why there’s little enthusiasm among Democrats today for the extended bipartisan negotiations that characterized the 2006 and 2013 efforts. Immigrant advocacy groups aren’t resisting efforts by Biden and Senate Democrats to seek possible areas of consensus with Republicans, but almost universally they consider them doomed to fail. At most, some advocates think it’s possible that 10 Senate Republicans – the number needed to break a GOP filibuster if every Democrat holds together – might support a pathway to citizenship for the young undocumented people brought to the US by their parents or conceivably even longtime agriculture workers. But very few believe that 10 GOP senators will support legal status for any significant remainder of the undocumented, whatever concessions Democrats offer on other issues, like tougher border security. That’s a key difference from the earlier negotiations, when Democrats operated on the assumption that if they provided sufficient reassurances on security, enough Republicans would embrace legalization. In this January 7, 2009, file photo, President George W. Bush shakes hands in the Oval Office with President-elect Barack Obama as former Presidents Bill Clinton and George H.W. Bush look on. Ron Sachs/Pool/Getty Images “We are working hard to get 10 Senate Republicans just to see if it’s viable,” said one leading immigration overhaul advocate, who asked to remain anonymous while discussing internal strategy. But, the advocate added, given “that Trump continues to drive the calculus about their next election,” there’s little expectation that 10 Republicans votes are ultimately available. As a result, the principal energy among immigrant advocates is toward convincing congressional Democrats to legalize as many of the undocumented as they can through the reconciliation process, which requires only a majority vote in the Senate. Their focus isn’t the reconciliation bill now moving on Biden’s Covid relief package, but rather another reconciliation bill that they expect him to unveil in a few weeks, encompassing his broader economic agenda. The advocates hope to include in that bill legalization for the young undocumented, farmworkers, immigrants who are in the US on so-called Temporary Protected Status (from countries experiencing natural disasters or political instability) and, beyond that, up to millions of additional undocumented people working in occupations that have been deemed “essential” during the pandemic. Together, those categories, which overlap somewhat, might cover as many as 7 million of the estimated 11 million undocumented workers. “The feeling is it ends up in reconciliation. That’s what we are driving toward,” the advocate added. Legalizing the undocumented, who in many cases are longtime residents or have US citizen children, has always been the top priority and moral center of the immigration debate for Democrats. But because the undocumented, by definition, are already living in the US and the vast majority are already participating in the workforce, they would not address the population squeeze that’s tightening on American society. Population growth slows, senior growth explodes The slowdown in population growth is one of the most significant changes in the political landscape since Congress last seriously tried to overhaul the immigration laws. In a recent paper, William Frey, a demographer at the Brookings Institution’s Metropolitan Policy Program, noted that from 2019 to 2020 the nation’s population grew more slowly than in any year since 1900. That was obviously influenced by the pandemic, but more troublingly, Frey reported that with deaths rising, births declining and immigration contracting during the Trump years, the nation’s population growth rate from 2010 through 2020 “could be the lowest in any decade since the first census was conducted in 1790.” The details of this slowdown are even more discouraging. While the working-age population is stagnating, the senior population is exploding. Even under current levels of immigration, the Census Bureau projects that the senior population will grow by nearly 40% from now through 2035, almost exactly 10 times as fast as the working-age population. “Sooner or later people are going to look at this chart and say, ‘We are going to need more people in our labor force. We are going to need more customers,’ ” Frey told me. In a recent paper, Noorani and co-author Danilo Zak calculated that these trends will produce a precipitous decline in what’s called the “dependency ratio,” the number of working-age adults – defined as those aged 18-64 – available to support each senior. Today there are about 3.5 working-age adults for each senior; by 2060, that number will plummet to 2.7, the lowest in modern times. Such a decline will increase pressure either for cuts in federal retirement programs, difficult tax increases on the working-age population to fund those programs or some combination of both. Despite this looming demographic squeeze, Trump and congressional Republicans repeatedly tried to slash the levels of legal immigration. In 2018 four-fifths of House Republicans and nearly three-fourths of Senate Republicans voted to cut legal immigration by more than 40%. While that bill failed, Trump instituted a dizzying array of administrative actions to reduce legal immigration. And while those changes lowered the level of legal immigration only relatively modestly from its high point in 2016 (when it reached about 1.2 million), Anderson says Trump’s policies would likely have imposed much more severe reductions through a second term, perhaps cutting immigration levels to around only 600,000 annually. Trump’s persistent attempts to restrict legal immigration belied his frequent insistence that he wanted people to come to the US but only if they followed the law. His effort reflected the cultural hostility to immigration of all sorts that now characterizes most of the GOP electorate. In a recent national survey by the nonpartisan Public Religion Research Institute, almost three-fifths of Republicans agreed with the openly xenophobic statement that “immigrants are invading our country and replacing our cultural and ethnic background”; among Republicans who relied heavily on Fox News for information, agreement soared to two-thirds. We need to be talking about the future of immigration with the bottom-line self-interest of Americans who want to retire in mind. Ali Noorani, president, National Immigration Forum In another recent survey of Trump voters by the conservative Ethics and Public Policy Center, almost two-thirds said they wanted to reduce the number of immigrants admitted to the US and nearly as many said they wanted to deport all of the undocumented – while most Americans in polls consistently say they would provide the undocumented a path to citizenship. Those attitudes expose the great irony of the immigration debate. The nation’s growing diversity is centered among the young: Frey says the 2020 census will find that for the first time, a majority of the nation’s under-18 population is non-White. But because the US largely cut off immigration from 1924 to 1965, most older Americans are White. I’ve described this demographic contrast as a collision between “the brown and the gray,” and one of its many implications is that through the 21st century, a growing and preponderantly White senior population will depend on an increasingly non-White working-age population to pay the taxes that fund Social Security and Medicare. The older Whites in Trump’s coalition enthusiastically backing Republican politicians who promise to cut immigration are voting to endanger the entitlements on which they rely by slashing the number of working-age taxpayers available to support them. Proposed tweaks to the system In a paper published earlier this month, Noorani and Zak argued for reorienting legal immigration policy around that dynamic. They argue the US should set legal immigration levels with the goal of maintaining the dependency ratio at about its current level of 3.5 working-age adults for each retiree. As the senior population grows over the coming decades, that would require roughly a 37% increase in legal immigration – about 370,000 more people a year than the roughly 1 million to 1.2 million annually the US has been admitting. “We need to be talking about the future of immigration with the bottom-line self-interest of Americans who want to retire in mind,” Noorani says. Neither the White House nor congressional Democrats have yet produced an estimate of how many more people their plans would admit, and each seems reluctant to do so. But in the detailed analysis shared with CNN, Anderson calculates that if fully implemented, the Democratic proposal would essentially meet Noorani’s target. Anderson projects that the bill would increase the flow of legal immigrants to about 1.5 million annually. At points over the coming decade, he says, the increase would be even greater, because the bill also would clear out the huge backlogs that now have nearly 3.8 million eligible immigrants waiting for family reunification visas. Under the legislation, he calculates, America’s working-age population would grow by nearly one-fourth more each year than it would under current policy. The bill does not fundamentally restructure the legal immigration system, which now admits migrants primarily through two principal streams: family reunification and employment. But it adjusts the rules in seemingly technical ways across multiple entry points in that system, systematically widening the spigot. For instance, the legislation seems to make only a minor change in the employment-based system, increasing the number of visas from the current 140,000 annually to 170,000. But in fact, Anderson notes, the bill could more than double the number of employment-based entrants (a top priority for business groups). The reason: While the spouses and minor children of employment-based immigrants are now counted against that 140,000 annual cap, they would be exempted from the new (higher) limit. That would allow all of the slots to be used for employment-based applicants – and would have a further multiplying effect by creating eligibility for the immediate family members of that larger group. Other key changes include allowing all foreign students who earn Ph.D.s in the US to receive green cards, a pilot program allowing cities or counties facing population loss to sponsor immigrants who will relocate there and slightly increasing the number of visas available to countries whose small immigration flows make them eligible for the “diversity lottery” (while again multiplying the impact by exempting spouses and minor children from the count). It is hard to have this discussion now that we’ve had a terrible economic tragedy, a terrible public health tragedy. But when you do immigration reform it should be what do you want to the rules of the road to be for the next 20 years. You don’t want to do this every year. Douglas Holtz-Eakin, president, American Action Forum Another big change: providing visas to any eligible immigrant who has been waiting 10 years or more because of annual caps and country limits that restrict entry for certain family members, such as adult children or siblings, of US citizens. (Typically, Democrats have supported clearing such backlogs before legalizing the undocumented to preempt the criticism that legalization penalizes immigrants who have been legally waiting in line.) While employment- and family-based immigration have been pitted against each other in the previous legislative debates, Noorani says that’s a false choice: Whichever door migrants come through, he notes, the vast majority will eventually join the workforce, which is exactly what the US needs in the coming years. “You can make a case that anybody who is working age is a net contributor to the system,” he says. But can it get through Congress? The question is whether any of this has a path toward becoming law. One obstacle is the partisan conundrum noted above: Legal immigration revisions are likely to make the cut only if there’s a comprehensive bill, rather than a package that’s stripped down to try to squeeze it into reconciliation. But there will be a comprehensive package only if 10 Senate Republicans are willing to vote for one, and given Trump’s continuing influence that seems dubious – despite strong business community support for such a deal. Timing is a problem too. With millions of Americans still unemployed as a result of the pandemic, this isn’t the ideal time to talk about the need to add more people to the workforce. Yet experts say America must shape these policies with an eye not on the next few months but on the next few decades. “It is hard to have this discussion now that we’ve had a terrible economic tragedy, a terrible public health tragedy,” says Holtz-Eakin. “But when you do immigration reform it should be what do you want to the rules of the road to be for the next 20 years. You don’t want to do this every year.” Yet even amid the pandemic, awareness of the population squeeze – and its implications for the economy – may be growing. Neil Bradley, executive vice president and chief policy officer of the US Chamber of Commerce, says, “We are beginning to hear it in the states and almost on a local basis.” While concerns about population loss have been greatest in rural areas, increasingly “you hear people talking about it in Rust Belt cities,” he notes. “If we’re going to do immigration reform it’s critical that we think through what provisions work best for supporting the economy, and increasing legal immigration is one of the best things you can do to support future economic growth.” If we’re going to do immigration reform it’s critical that we think through what provisions work best for supporting the economy, and increasing legal immigration is one of the best things you can do to support future economic growth. Neil Bradley, executive vice president, US Chamber of Commerce The most optimistic scenario is that even if legal immigration loses out in this year’s legislative maneuvering, success in legalizing some portion of the undocumented population through the special reconciliation process will generate momentum for more action later. Jorge Loweree, policy director at the American Immigration Council, an immigrant advocacy group, notes that every attempt to deal with any aspect of the immigration system has ultimately foundered on the emotional issue of addressing the undocumented. If that’s removed from the equation, he says, “there is the prospect … it opens the door to potentially a bipartisan consensus on moving something on legal immigration down the road, with a new coalition. … We can’t quite get to that point, because we are stuck on this threshold question of legalization for the undocumented.” The immigration debate has rarely rewarded optimism in the past few decades. But there’s mounting demographic evidence the US will pay a heavy economic price in the next few decades if it can’t break the immigration stalemate to alleviate its population squeeze. “Without legal immigration, the United States is not going to see sustained population growth and we’ll see declining economic growth as a consequence,” says Cato’s Bier. “It’s just that simple.”
CNN — A 4-year-old girl wipes her mother’s tears inside a migrant respite center in El Paso, Texas. An act of love this mom says her daughter has made more times than she can remember since they left their native Nicaragua. “She would tell me, ‘Mom, don’t cry.’” Yensel Castro says. Castro wipes away more tears as she recounts the dangerous journey through Mexico with her daughter Camila. “I witnessed a rape. It hurts my soul,” Castro says, crying. Little Camila looks at her mom with a sense of worry as Castro shares the horrific story. Castro believes she was likely spared from rape on their journey because she had Camila with her. She says those are the risks women take to flee “dictatorship and much poverty” in her home country, where people have no “freedom of expression.” The Castros were among the more than 580,000 migrants who were apprehended at the US southern border by Border Patrol, processed and released by immigration authorities into the United States this fiscal year pending immigration proceedings, according to US Customs and Border Protection data. In August alone, immigration agents encountered more than 203,000 individuals at the southern border. Migrants from just three countries – Venezuela, Nicaragua and Cuba – made up about 56,000 of those encounters, or about 28 percent, federal data shows. After an encounter at the border a migrant could be detained, immediately expelled from the US or released pending immigration proceedings. The migrants gather outside the church on Wednesday, September 14. Ray Ewing/Vineyard Gazette/AP The man who recruited migrants for flights to Martha's Vineyard says he feels betrayed Among the latest arrivals were the roughly 50 asylum hopefuls – mostly Venezuelans – sent from Texas to Martha’s Vineyard, Massachusetts, last month on flights organized by Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis – part of a series of moves by Republican governors to transport migrants to liberal areas to protest what they describe as the failure of the federal government to secure the southern border. Attorneys for the migrants have filed a class action lawsuit, saying they were misled in agreeing to the flights and had been told that they would arrive to find housing, jobs and help with the immigration process. In response to the lawsuit, DeSantis’ office repeated what was previously said: The transportation of migrants from Texas to Martha’s Vineyard “was done on a voluntary basis.” CBP Commissioner Chris Magnus says the latest wave of migration is mostly driven by people fleeing the “failing communist regimes” in Venezuela, Nicaragua and Cuba, which is complicating the processing and removal of those individuals once they arrive in the US, as they are generally not subject to Title 42. Title 42 is the pandemic public health order that since 2020 has allowed immigration authorities to swiftly expel some migrants to Mexico or their home countries. Rising levels of repression, food shortages and economic stability are motivating Venezuelans and Nicaraguans to flee their homelands said Doris Meissner, who directs US immigration policy work at the nonpartisan Migration Policy Institute in Washington. “These populations … require different kinds of response,” Meissner told CNN recently. “We have not established an asylum system that is in any way up to the level of the challenge that this change brought about.” ‘I don’t think this is sustainable long term’ El Paso's US Border Patrol sector erected this open-air triage processing center after immigration agents realized that the spike in migration was not an anomaly. Rosa Flores/CNN In Del Rio, Texas, a small border town of about 35,000 residents, border patrol vans and buses constantly drop off migrants who have been processed by immigration agents at the Val Verde Border Humanitarian Coalition – the one migrant respite center in town. So far this year, more than 32,000 migrants have come through the center, a nearly 40% increase over last year’s total, according to Tiffany Burrow, the center’s director of operations. “It’s just been so consistently growing that we’ve been able to adapt. But I don’t think this is sustainable long term,” Burrow told CNN. Asylum seeking migrants are transported by US Customs and Border Protection agents, after crossing the Rio Grande River into the US on July 26, 2022. Go Nakamura/Reuters The migrant crisis is so much larger than DeSantis' stunt El Paso, which is about 400 miles northwest of Del Rio, opened its own migrant respite center last month after shelters there reached maximum capacity and people started pitching tents on the street. That’s where CNN first met Yensel Castro and her daughter, in the children’s play area of the center. Castro’s voice broke and her eyes flooded with tears as soon as she started talking about her mother waiting for her in Chicago. “I miss her so much,” she said between sobs, explaining that she had no money to travel to Chicago, where her mom was waiting for her. She said her mother left Nicaragua for Chicago five months ago and had been working to rent a home for the three of them. A short drive from the respite center, El Paso’s Border Patrol Sector recently erected an open-air triage-style processing center under a highway overpass to help process migrants faster. The brochure, which has now been posted by the legal group representing many of the cases, features a photo of what appears to be a road sign that reads "Massachusetts Welcomes You" and a photo of an nondescript lighthouse. CNN obscured parts of this image to remove the phone numbers. Lawyers for Civil Rights Attorneys for migrants sent to Martha's Vineyard looking into origination of brochures they believe were handed out under 'false pretenses' CNN got access to the center, which includes sections for intake, medical care and a waiting area, last month. Buses equipped with processing technology were parked on-site. Migrants don’t stay there very long, a few hours at the most. They are swiftly processed and divided into two groups, those who will be expelled to Mexico under Title 42 and those who are allowed to stay, pending their immigration proceedings. “It’s like a mobile command center,” Magnus told CNN during an interview on-site. Magnus explained that people are given the opportunity to seek asylum, they are being vetted, and criminal backgrounds are being checked. Far from the border, other Texas cities are responding to the crisis. San Antonio recently opened a respite center and another one is in the planning stages in Houston. Chicago, New York and Washington, DC have been forced to respond after several Republican governors transported migrants in buses to their cities unannounced. America’s backlogged immigration system A child sleeps at the El Paso airport after his family's one month journey from Venezuela. According to the child's father, the family is seeking asylum in the United States. Rosa Flores/CNN The recently arrived migrants and asylum seekers are entering a highly complicated and backlogged immigration system. This fiscal year alone, U.S. immigration Courts recorded over 819,000 new immigration cases. At the end of August, there were nearly 2 million immigration cases pending in immigration courts. That total includes 743,250 cases in which asylum claims have been made and are still pending, according to an analysis of government data by Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse (TRAC) at Syracuse University. There are hundreds of thousands more asylum cases going through US Citizenship and Immigration Services, the USCIS ombudsman told the National Law Review in July. GENEVA, UNITED STATES - 2022/08/24: Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis speaks to supporters at a campaign stop on the Keep Florida Free Tour at the Horsepower Ranch in Geneva. DeSantis faces former Florida Gov. Charlie Crist for the general election for Florida Governor in November. (Photo by Paul Hennessy/SOPA Images/LightRocket via Getty Images) Paul Hennessy/SOPA Images/LightRocket/Getty Images While DeSantis was flying legal asylum seekers to Martha's Vineyard, business owners in his state were struggling for workers “It can take many years for the government to even call them [asylum seekers] for an interview or to go to court,” says Conchita Cruz, the co-executive director of the Asylum Seeker Advocacy Project (ASAP), a non-profit organization with more than 400,000 asylum seeker members from 175 countries. In late May, the Biden administration launched an effort to speed up some types of asylum claims. The rule authorizes asylum officers – and not just immigration court judges – to consider asylum claims for those who assert a fear of persecution and pass the credible fear screening. The effort, which is being implemented in a phased manner, is expected to shorten the process of some asylum applications, from several years on average to several months, according to the DHS. But while that program rolls out, frustration over asylum application delays is compounded by another layer of the process. Individuals going through the asylum process have to apply separately for the right to work legally. Cruz says asylum seekers are eligible to apply for a work permit 150 days after they file for asylum and, under the law, the federal government has 30 days to process applications. At the end of March about 443,000 work permit cases were pending, according to a USCIS spokesperson. Migrants transported from Texas arrive at the Port Authority bus terminal in New York City, New York, U.S., August 25, 2022. REUTERS/David 'Dee' Delgado David 'Dee' Delgado/Reuters/FILE As record numbers of migrants arrive in New York City, officials say they are examining their legal options That month USCIS established new goals to reduce the agency’s pending caseload, the spokesperson said. ASAP and various other non-profit groups are in an ongoing legal battle with the federal government over work permit delays for asylum seekers. Cruz and her legal team are asking a judge to order USCIS to process its members’ work permit applications in 30 days, as the law requires. “The government should comply, and process asylum seekers’ work permits as quickly as possible whether they’re forced to by a federal judge and a court order or not,” Cruz said. In a statement to CNN, USCIS said the agency does not comment on issues directly related to pending litigation; but the agency acknowledged the “historic volumes of employment authorization requests” and noted its efforts to curb delays. “USCIS set new agency-wide backlog reduction goals, expanded premium processing to additional form types, and implemented efforts to improve timely access to employment authorization documents. The agency remains committed to upholding America’s promise as a nation of welcome and possibility with fairness, integrity, and respect for all we serve,” a spokesperson told CNN by email. The faces of America’s new asylum seekers CNN has met dozens of migrants and asylum hopefuls in respite centers and shelters along the US southern border in the past few months. It’s at these centers that migrants get the opportunity to charge their cellphones, contact family to let them know they’ve been processed by immigration authorities and released into the United States, and where they take buses and planes to the interior of the country. Ismael Martinez says he's renting a room in New York for $1,000 per month. Rosa Flores/CNN Ismael Martinez says he was a professional artist from Venezuela. He was processed by immigration authorities in Texas in April. He has since moved to New York, where he is selling hand-made jewelry on the street. He is renting a room for $1,000 per month. He has started his immigration proceedings and is waiting to file his asylum claim. Franklin Delgado brought his four children from Venezuela. He plans to enroll them in school. Rosa Flores/CNN Franklin Delgado and his four children, ages 1 to 12, were processed by immigration authorities in El Paso last month. He says his wife couldn’t make the dangerous journey from Venezuela on foot because she is partially paralyzed. The family slept at the airport while they waited to fly to Atlanta. Delgado plans to start his immigration proceedings and enroll the children in school. Jessy Amaya lived in a homeless shelter in San Antonio for a while until he started working in construction. Courtesy Jessy Amaya Jessy Amaya says he was a paramedic in Venezuela before he migrated to the United States in April. He lived in a homeless shelter in San Antonio for a while until he started working construction. Since then, he has purchased a vehicle to get around and rented a two-bedroom home for $800 per month. He has started his immigration proceedings and is waiting to file his asylum claim. ‘I’m starting from zero and it’s very tough’ Yensel Castro fled Nicaragua with her 4-year-old daughter Camila. Castro says she's now "in a very complicated situation." Rosa Flores/CNN For Yensel Castro, the migrant who said she witnessed the rape on her journey to the US with her child, reuniting with her mother in Chicago has been a rollercoaster of emotion. She was able to catch a bus, provided by the City of El Paso, the day she spoke with CNN. But the reunion was not what she expected. Castro says she was surprised to learn that her mom was very sick with arthritis and can no longer work. “I’m in a very complicated situation,” Castro says. Castro says she was processed by immigration authorities and released into the country last month. But she still has to go through her immigration proceedings, file an asylum application and get a work permit. And she is responsible for taking care of both her ailing parent and Camila. U.S. Border Patrol agents take a father and son from Honduras into custody near the U.S.-Mexico border on June 12, 2018 near Mission, Texas. The asylum seekers were then sent to a U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) processing center for possible separation. U.S. border authorities are executing the Trump administration's zero tolerance policy towards undocumented immigrants. U.S. Attorney General Jeff Sessions also said that domestic and gang violence in immigrants' country of origin would no longer qualify them for political-asylum status. John Moore/Getty Images John Moore/Getty Images Justice Department wants psychological examinations of parents suing after being separated from children at US-Mexico border “I thought it would be easy, that upon arriving I’d be working the next day,” Castro said. “I’m starting from zero and it’s very tough.” Castro says she’s so desperate for help that when a woman she met at the grocery store offered her a bag of hand-me-down clothes for Camila, she walked for two hours, one hour each way, to get the items. Once home, Castro showed her daughter each piece of clothing one by one. She took video of the moment and shared it with CNN. Camila’s face lit up with excitement when her mom pulled out a long-sleeved shirt with a Christmas tree surrounded by presents and a puppy. “Do you like it?” Castro asked. “Yes,” Camila said. “It fits me.” In the video, Camila holds up the shirt basking in joy that seemed unimaginable just a few days earlier at the migrant respite center – where her journey in the US began. CNN’s Rosalina Nieves and Julia Jones contributed to this report.
CNN — Last month, as the Biden administration scrambled to manage the latest wave of migrants overwhelming the US southern border, top US immigration authorities crossed into Mexico for an emergency meeting. Seated around a Ciudad Juárez conference room, the officials and their Mexican counterparts drafted a 15-point plan to help defuse the flashpoint – most of it a checklist of actions for the Mexican government. Notably, according to a readout from Mexico’s federal immigration agency, Mexico agreed to carry out more costly deportations of the migrants gathering on their side of the border – a move that some believed would dissuade disorderly crossings. The measures, which also specified Mexican efforts to clamp down on the crush of migrants riding north on railcars, are the latest in a series of policy shifts in Mexico that have alleviated, if slightly, the massive political headache in Washington caused perennially by migration. Analysts in both countries see a pragmatic bargain: as Mexico increasingly carries the weight of US immigration strategy, the Biden administration has granted rare leeway to the country’s divisive but popular leader. “Mexico has real leverage in the relationship with the US. And right now that leverage is around migration,” said Andrew Selee, the president of the nonpartisan Migration Policy Institute. Members of the Mexican National Guard stand on the border between Mexico and Guatemala to prevent the crossing of migrant caravans on October 21, 2022. Stringer/AFP/Getty Images Sharing nearly 2,000 miles of land border and a history of important economic exchange, Mexico and the US have long held intertwined immigration policies that adapted as international migration patterns shifted. When George W. Bush made his first trip out of the US as president in 2001, it was to the ranch of Vicente Fox, the Mexican leader, to discuss a new era of cooperation on border issues, like trade, drugs, and the northward flow of Mexicans, who at that time comprised the bulk of undocumented border-crossers. But as spiraling violence and desperate economic conditions fueled years of mass migration out of Central America and the Caribbean to the US, overpowering the country’s legal intake system, the stretch of Mexican territory in between became a critical “buffer state,” said Maureen Meyer of the Washington Office on Latin America. “The Mexico southern border pretty much was the US southern border,” Meyer said. Emergency personnel work at the scene where several Cuban migrants died after a truck accident in Pijijiapan, Chiapas, Mexico October 1, 2023, in this screen grab taken from a handout video. CNN has blurred a portion of this image due to its graphic nature. Lugos TV/Handout/Reuters At least 10 Cuban migrants die after truck overturns in Mexico, officials say Under pressure from several US administrations, Mexico has repeatedly sent resources to its border with Guatemala over the past 10 years to formalize migration routes and detained record numbers of migrants at newly installed checkpoints as they made their way north. At the helm of Mexico’s latest immigration coordination with the US has been President Andrés Manuel López Obrador, a leftist leader who in 2018 campaigned on resistance to doing the US’s “dirty work” on migration. His political calculus has changed swiftly since then. Crossing ‘another line’ in immigration enforcement Under the threat of crippling tariffs from then-President Donald Trump, López Obrador agreed in 2019 to allow asylum applicants to wait out their claims inside Mexico under the “Remain in Mexico” policy, roiling activists who said it forced migrants into dangerous living conditions. During the pandemic, when the US employed a public health measure known as Title 42 to turn around many asylum seekers at the border, López Obrador agreed to receive many of the migrants, reversing a long-standing position in the country and straining the resources of Mexico’s own border cities. In May, as the US ended the use of Title 42, López Obrador continued to allow the returns on “humanitarian grounds.” “I think these more recent steps really do cross another line because it is not just stopping people from coming to the United States, which has been the more enforcer role,” Meyer said. “It is actually allowing people deported from the United States to either stay in Mexico, or in this case now, actually maybe actively returning them back to their home countries for the United States,” she said. Migrants, who were stranded a day earlier near Villa Ahumada, and who are seeking asylum in the United States, cross the Rio Bravo river, as seen from Ciudad Juarez , Mexico September 30, 2023. REUTERS/Jose Luis Gonzalez Jose Luis Gonzalez/Reuters Unlawful border crossings hit high for the year with over 200,000 apprehensions in September Details on the deportation plan announced last month have been limited. In a news conference from Washington on Friday, Mexican Foreign Secretary Alicia Bárcena said that Mexican authorities were carrying out six flights each week to return migrants to Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador. Bárcena added that officials were “exploring” the possibility of expanding the returns to Ecuador, Venezuela, and Colombia. It was unclear where the deportation flights were taking place and when they had begun. It also couldn’t be learned if the migrants being returned had already been deported from the US or if they had pending asylum claims. Stakeholders in Mexico told CNN last week that there had not appeared to be any significant change in the pace of repatriation flights in the country’s north. A spokeswoman for Mexico’s federal immigration agency declined to provide more details on the deportations. But the announcement may already have had the effect of discouraging migrants from crossing to the US without the appointment required to seek an asylum claim. In the weekend that followed the meeting, the number of migrants encountered by border authorities entering the US near El Paso, Texas, fell by about 30%, CNN has reported. Last Wednesday, López Obrador also announced that he was planning a summit with officials from several Latin American and Caribbean countries “whose populations are migrating” to be held in the coming days. Mexico also last month agreed to urge countries like Venezuela, Nicaragua, and Cuba — which have limited diplomatic relations with the US — to take back their citizens deported at the border. “What we are looking for is to reach an agreement to confront the migration phenomenon by addressing the causes,” López Obrador said at a news conference. “We have to align ourselves.” An uptick in shuttle diplomacy The recent cooperation between the two countries has come with a busy schedule of shuttle diplomacy. Last week, Bárcena held meetings in Washington with Senate leaders and Elizabeth Sherwood-Randall, Biden’s homeland security advisor. US Secretary of State Antony Blinken is expected to travel to Mexico this week along with other cabinet secretaries and meet with López Obrador. For Mexican negotiators, the country’s increased responsibilities have often been conditioned on a US commitment to grow the ways that migrants can enter the country legally, like through temporary work visas and a recently expanded humanitarian parole program that the Biden administration says has allowed tens of thousands of Cubans, Haitians, Nicaraguans, and Venezuelans who meet certain conditions, including a local sponsor in the US, to fly into the country and secure work authorization. Claudia Sheinbaum, left, and Xochitl Galvez Getty Images In the country of 'machismo,' a woman will be the next president Last month, ahead of the announcement around Mexican deportations, Mexico’s foreign minister told Bloomberg in an interview that the US and Mexico were nearing an agreement with the United Nations to pre-screen tens of thousands of migrants in Mexico for entry into the US under the parole programs. The US has opened similar processing centers in Colombia, Costa Rica, and Guatemala. A United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees spokesperson told CNN that the organization is “regularly in contact with US and Mexican authorities including on how we can provide support to possible future initiatives.” “Politically for the Mexican government, they can’t do enhanced enforcement without showing that they are also fighting for the well-being of migrants and for legal opportunities, because it is a country with a history of migration to the United States,” Selee said. A free hand for Lopez Obrador? Still, some analysts see a more cynical incentive behind the cooperation, arguing that the Biden administration has largely turned a blind eye to elements of López Obrador’s agenda that would have typically drawn rebuke. “López Obrador very quickly understood that if he gave into Biden’s request for support he would have significant political capital to ensure that US pressure on a number of either bilateral issues or domestic Mexican policy issues would be constrained,” said Arturo Sarukhán, a former Mexican ambassador to Washington who has been a critic of the current administration. Detractors point to democratic backsliding in a number of López Obrador’s positions: an attempted reform of the country’s independent election authority, frequent criticism of the judiciary and the press, and the capitulation of state powers on policing and transportation to the military. The election reform, which was passed earlier this year but later blocked by the Mexican Supreme Court, diminished the country’s independent election authority, cutting its workforce across the country and limiting its autonomy ahead of a presidential vote next year. Tens of thousands of Mexicans marched on the capital against the policy in the largest opposition protest of López Obrador’s presidency. Critics decried it as a dangerous erosion of democratic institutions. But in Washington, the Biden administration was unusually muted. In a statement following the February protests, Ned Price, a senior adviser to Blinken, described “a great debate on electoral reforms on the independence of electoral and judicial institutions that illustrates Mexico’s vibrant democracy.” “We respect Mexico’s sovereignty. We believe that a well-resourced, independent electoral system and respect for judicial independence support healthy democracy,” Price said. If Mexico had less leverage in its relationship with the US, “I think that you’d see greater public pressure from the State Department, from the White House, on the slippery slope of democratic erosion that we’re seeing in Mexico,” Sarukhán said. “I think the United States should be invested in Mexico’s democratic strength because if not, what you’ll have in Washington sooner or later is someone asking the question, ‘Who lost Mexico and why?’” he added.
CNN — Another record-breaking surge of migrants may attempt to cross the US-Mexico border this spring, alarming officials who are now rushing to build more facilities and lining up prison buses to help accommodate the new arrivals. The head of the US Border Patrol says he’s getting ready for as many as 8,000 people to be apprehended daily, more than double the daily number of the 2019 surge under the Trump administration. A migrant from Haiti near the San Ysidro Port of Entry border crossing bridge in Tijuana, Mexico, on Tuesday, March 22, 2022. Cesar Rodriguez/Bloomberg/Getty Images Biden administration finalizes new rule reshaping US asylum system That staggering number “will probably become the norm over the next 30 to 45 days,” Border Patrol Chief Raul Ortiz told CNN in an exclusive interview. There have already been 940,000 arrests this fiscal year, which started in October. The projections paint a grim outlook for the Biden administration just months from a politically contentious midterm election and as the administration tries to project a welcoming message to refugees amid the war in Ukraine. Border arrests ebb and flow regardless of who is in the Oval Office. But deteriorating conditions in Latin America that were exacerbated by the coronavirus pandemic are among the factors that have contributed to people wanting to migrate to the United States. That’s already put President Joe Biden in a precarious position following a surge of unaccompanied migrant children last spring and the abrupt arrival of thousands of primarily Haitian migrants last September. Officials have assessed those surges to better respond to future upticks in migrants and leverage agencies across the government to assist in the event of more arrivals, like the Bureau of Prisons which can provide vehicles for the transportation of migrants from the border to facilities for intake. “We’re managing a flow that’s significant,” Ortiz told CNN. “As I get to, you know, 7,000 to 7,500 a day average, that’s going to put additional strain.” Over the course of the last year, Border Patrol has at times faced 8,000 encounters a day. PRZEMYSL, POLAND - MARCH 21: People, mainly women and children, arrive at Przemysl train station on a train from Odesa in war-torn Ukraine on March 21, 2022 in Przemysl Poland. Nearly two-thirds of the more than 3 million people to have fled Ukraine since Russia's invasion last month have come to Poland, which shares a 310-mile border with its eastern neighbor. (Photo by Jeff J Mitchell/Getty Images) Jeff J Mitchell/Getty Images The refugee crisis is much bigger than Ukraine Internal documents have shown estimates of how many people are within hours or days of the US-Mexico border who might plan to migrate to the United States, according to a source familiar with discussions. The Department of Homeland Security has set up a “Southwest Border Coordination Center” at its headquarters to coordinate across multiple agencies. But as officials prepare for potential mass migration to the US southern border, some sectors are already feeling the strain. In Del Rio, Texas, agents faced groups of hundreds of migrants turning themselves over to agents for six consecutive days. Facilities across the border are over capacity already and held over 16,000 migrants on Tuesday morning, Ortiz told CNN. Future of Title 42 Border Patrol Chief Raul L. Ortiz speaks to the media in Del Rio, Texas, on Sunday, September 19, 2021. Eric Gay/AP For two years, border authorities have relied on a public health authority, known as Title 42, to swiftly expel migrants, including asylum seekers, encountered at the US-Mexico border, an unprecedented departure from traditional protocols. Despite mounting pressure and scrutiny from Biden’s allies, the administration has continued to rely on the authority. As the pandemic landscape evolves, discussions about terminating that order have picked up speed, sources tell CNN. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is expected to release its latest assessment of the authority in the coming days. Senate Democrats, including Majority Leader Chuck Schumer, have called on the administration to do away with the public health authority. Video Ad Feedback 'Political theater': National Guardsman on Abbott's border operation 03:36 - Source: CNN “As the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention relaxes it domestic COVID-19 protocols, it is perplexing that the agency continues to recommend the extended use of this draconian policy at the border, contradicting the overwhelming signs of America’s pandemic recovery under President Biden’s leadership,” Sens. Schumer, Bob Menendez, Alex Padilla, and Cory Booker said in a recent statement. If the public health order is terminated, the administration would return to traditional protocols which might include releasing migrants into the US while they go through their immigration proceedings, detaining migrants, or removing them if they don’t have an asylum claim. On Thursday, the administration announced a new federal regulation that would shorten the process for migrants making an asylum claim, though it’s not expected to take effect until the summer and will be a slow ramp up. The change in demographics has been an ongoing challenge for an agency built to address single adult males. Border facilities – akin to jail-like conditions – are not equipped to care for families and children who’ve arrived at the border without their parents, especially in such large numbers, prompting a need for additional facilities. The Border Patrol uses soft-sided facilities for processing migrants in select locations along the US-Mexico border. But in anticipation of more people, the agency is planning to expand the current footprint of those facilities in Yuma, Arizona, and Del Rio, Texas, Ortiz said. There are also ongoing discussions about so-called joint processing centers – a new concept where multiple agencies work together to intake migrants. The locations of those centers have not been determined. Maribel, who resides in Maryland with her children, fled Honduras in 2014 and has been waiting nearly eight years for a resolution on her asylum claim. Courtesy Maribel Eight years. Three Presidents. And still no resolution on an asylum claim. “We have, I think, improved conditions across the board. We just need additional capacity and that’s part of why the academy is so important, why our processing coordinators are so important because we want to balance it out against out border security,” Ortiz said, citing the Border Patrol Academy where agents get training before deploying to the field. Asked about whether the administration plans to offer Covid-19 vaccines to migrants, Ortiz said those discussions are ongoing. This month, 126 agents graduated from the Border Patrol Academy, including 35 agents this week who will soon be deployed to the field. Even so, the Department of Homeland Security is seeking more help within its workforce. DHS Deputy Secretary John Tien recently asked department personnel to volunteer at the US-Mexico border in an email sent to the workforce. Border Patrol also detailed 350 additional Border Patrol agents to assist at the US southern border and another 150 agents are helping with processing remotely. The Chief said he also plans to lean on groups, like Jose Andres’ World Central Kitchen and the Red Cross, for aid. “I want to continue those types of relationships, because that’s a big part of our strategy is making sure one that you know, we can do everything we can to secure the border, but we can’t do it by ourselves,” Ortiz said. “We have to work with our communities and partners and everyone else out there.”
CNN — The Justice Department is requiring some immigrants facing deportation to file to stay in the United States in a matter of weeks, a highly unusual move that puts them at a disadvantage and at an increased risk of removal. Immigrants fighting deportation generally have a chance to make their case in court, where they can ask a judge to allow them to stay in the US by arguing they qualify for asylum or another legal option. This year, as the coronavirus pandemic gripped the US, the nation’s immigration court system – which is operated by the Justice Department – partially shut down, leading to the postponement of hearings and fueling the growing backlog already facing the system. As of August 2020, the current active court case backlog grew to around 1.2 million, up 11% from the start of March, according to Syracuse University’s Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse, which tracks immigration court data. Immigrants seeking asylum walk at the ICE South Texas Family Residential Center, Friday, Aug. 23, 2019, in Dilley, Texas. U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement hosted a media tour of the center that houses families who are pending disposition of their immigration cases.(AP Photo/Eric Gay) Eric Gay/AP Children facing deportation are asking Trump and Biden for help But as of late, despite the challenges posed by the pandemic, immigration attorneys have begun to see a slate of orders requesting that their clients file applications requesting relief from deportation within around five to six weeks. If the deadline is not met, a judge could issue a removal order, meaning they’d be subject to deportation at any time. Victoria Neilson, a managing attorney at the Catholic Legal Immigration Network, called the orders “disturbing” and “politically motivated.” “The intended result appears to be to increase deportation to even people who have every intent of filing an application with an immigration court. For some people, their next court date is not for many months or a year into the future,” she said. Over the course of Donald Trump’s presidency, the administration has overhauled the US immigration system, making an already complicated process more difficult to navigate and succeed in. And in the waning weeks of Trump’s time in office, his administration has continued to press forward with policy changes, including the release of regulations tightening asylum and ramping up asylum agreements with Central American countries. The latest move by the Justice Department’s Executive Office for Immigration Review has left attorneys scrambling, particularly those representing migrant children. “These out-of-the-blue type orders leave vulnerable children and their attorneys without adequate time to take the steps necessary to prepare and submit, to optimally prepare and submit applications for relief,” said Jason Boyd, director of policy at Kids in Need of Defense, which provides legal services to migrant children. “In that respect, these orders fly in the face of fundamental fairness.” Children have also typically been afforded more time to prepare. “On account of mail delays and other factors, many of these children have been left with approximately three weeks to submit applications with potentially life and death consequences,” Boyd said. The Justice Department has not responded to a request for comment. In one instance, a scheduling order for a child who arrived in the US unaccompanied signed on October 29 says an application must be received by December 1, according to a copy shared with CNN. “An application for relief was due at a master calendar hearing that was adjourned due to COVID-19,” the order reads. “The Court hereby issues a new firm deadline for the Respondent to submit any and all applications for relief.” Failing to submit by the deadline, the order continues, could result in a removal order. Generally, deadlines for applications – which can take time to prepare and work their way through the system – are set out during court hearings. Meeting the deadline could also narrow the options that an individual is eligible for, since not all forms are granted by immigration court, some also go through US Citizenship and Immigration Services, which might take longer to process an application. In some cases, requests for applications are coming in months before an individual’s next court hearing. “In all of the cases, there’s some scrambling happening to make sure we’re doing the best even though we don’t feel this is right. We still have to comply with a judge’s deadline,” Claire Doutre, Houston managing attorney at Kids in Need of Defense, told CNN. Attorneys also told CNN that the orders that have so far been received have been signed by supervisory judges, not judges assigned to the case who would be more read in on the details of an individual’s situation and usually decide how much time a person is provided. “The judges are finding out that the cases have been pulled behind their back and orders have gone out. And it’s not clear what’s going to happen next,” said Judge Ashley Tabaddor, president of the National Association of Immigration Judges. “There’s nothing unreasonable about revisiting them and looking at it what would be appropriate. The problem is that it’s being done as a one-size-fits-all by the agency, outside of the judge. It’s a direct interference,” she added. Early on, migrant children in government custody attended deportation hearings despite the pandemic, at times leaving kids to face the proceedings without an attorney physically present with them.
A version of this story appeared in CNN’s What Matters newsletter. To get it in your inbox, sign up for free here. CNN — The strange reality of the dysfunctional, duct-taped US border policy is that a key portion was written by former President Donald Trump’s administration during the pandemic, enforced under pressure by the administration of President Joe Biden and is now at the whim of the Supreme Court. Meanwhile, CNN reporters on both sides of the border with Mexico on Tuesday encountered people who have already risked their lives on thousand-mile journeys to make it into the US. The plodding end of Title 42, as the Trump-era policy is known, has the government bracing for a surge of migrants it has long known would be coming. The Biden administration asked the Supreme Court for more time Tuesday night to prepare for the end of a policy it officially opposes. The Department of Homeland Security has projected between 9,000 and 14,000 migrants could attempt crossing the Southern border each day. Read more about Title 42 from CNN’s Catherine Shoichet. The first step is admitting the problem Rather than fix things over the past two years, Republican governors have engaged in a game of one-upsmanship, staging ever-more elaborate public displays to proclaim themselves the biggest champion of border security. Democrats, meanwhile, have seemed to refuse to acknowledge there is a crisis at the border and now the White House is scrambling at the last minute to vocalize a plan to deal with things. All the while, businesses – from the high-tech to the labor-intensive – are in need of workers to combat a labor shortage. And people who want to come to the US legally wait in line for years. It’s not possible to just ‘fix’ this “We’re not going to fix it immediately,” Theresa Cardinal Brown told me. She is managing director of immigration and cross-border policy at the Bipartisan Policy Center and said solutions will take time. “There’s not a button to push or switch or a single policy that will suddenly quote unquote ‘fix’ what is happening.” The major problem with US border policy over the past few decades is that Congress has failed to change policy. “Congress should be working on tweaking immigration on a regular basis – every few years,” she said, arguing that used to occur in the ’80s and ‘90s with tweaks to programs that responded to developments. Immigration is not a static thing. The motivations and situations of people who want to migrate change. And so do the needs of the US. “The longer they don’t act and the worse the problems get, the longer it will take to right the ship, to get order back, to manage it appropriately,” she said. Congress can make big things happen. But not on immigration Lawmakers are quickly coming together around a $1.7 trillion spending bill with extraneous bipartisan measures thrown in. But the bill left out a bipartisan proposal from Sens. Kyrsten Sinema, the erstwhile Arizona Democrat who’s now registered as an independent, and Thom Tillis, the North Carolina Republican, that would have given many of the 11 million undocumented people living in the US a pathway to legal status while also extending Title 42. We know what solutions look like Every president for a generation has tried, and failed, to enact some kind of comprehensive immigration reform. Experts argue that only a holistic approach will work and it needs to address two main problems: The millions of undocumented people living in the US The antiquated and broken legal immigration system, which does not appropriately acknowledge labor needs of the country and drives people to seek unlawful routes. “There’s not even a bipartisan agreement on whether there’s a crisis,” Muzaffar Chishti, director of the Migration Policy Institute’s New York office, said. “That, to me, is the beginning of the dysfunction of immigration.” This week proves the dysfunction, he said, as the future of Title 42 swirled and images of migrants were plastered on TV screens. “Here are clear images, clear facts, that there’s a crisis, and members of Congress choose nothing to do about it,” Chishti told me. Immediate problems on both sides of the border CNN’s Ed Lavandera, reporting from El Paso, described soldiers from the Texas National Guard deploying fence and barbed wire in areas where migrants have been crossing. The city’s Democratic mayor has declared a state of emergency and the city is looking for warehouse space to use as temporary shelter. “We’re also seeing where the politics of border security is taking over,” Lavandera told CNN’s Ana Cabrera Tuesday, noting the state has deployed those National Guard troops in a way that frustrates local officials, who Lavandera said want more help with food, shelter and transportation for migrants. “Right now officials are saying that they are going to continue moving ahead as if Title 42 is going to be lifted tomorrow,” Lavandera said on CNN Tuesday. Migrants have changed The profile of migrants has changed in the years during which Congress did little other than throw money at border security. What used to be individual men from Mexico coming to the US to work has turned into a tide of families coming from Venezuela, Nicaragua and Cuba, risking their lives for a dangerous journey over thousands of miles. That the immigration system is broken is not up for dispute. Whether it is fixable is a real question. Just across the border from El Paso in Ciudad Juarez, CNN’s David Culver has been talking to migrants who spent weeks traveling hundreds of miles, often on foot, and are now confused as they hope for asylum in the US. He kept in touch with migrants he met a month ago. One family found its way to Indianapolis and is waiting for a January court date. One man was driven all the way from El Paso to California and then deported into Tijuana. Another family is renting a house without a kitchen in Juarez and has tried twice to cross into the US. The current system can’t handle this “The system is already overwhelmed,” Ron Vitiello, the former acting director of US Immigration and Customs Enforcement during the Trump administration, told Cabrera. The end of Title 42 will mean more work for border officials, who have expelled migrants in half an hour under Title 42. When that policy is gone, it will take more than three hours per individual. Vitiello said a Trump-era policy whereby people seeking asylum should wait for a hearing in Mexico or be detained should be reinstated. Anything less, he argued, is the equivalent of an open border. Extend the stopgap policy or not? The Biden administration has a six-pillar approach to increase border resources, send additional agents to the border and crack down on unlawful entry. What the administration has not done is embrace an extension of Title 42, even as it asked the Supreme Court for more time Tuesday. Rep. Vicente Gonzalez, a Texas Democrat whose district includes portions of the border, said on CNN the US should maintain Title 42 as an ongoing policy and create a safe zone on the southern border of Mexico with Guatemala for asylum seekers to have their cases adjudicated before they arrive. “Until we build long-term immigration infrastructure further away from the border, we will always be dealing with this issue,” Gonzalez said. “People are running from poverty around the world and coming in very high numbers,” he added. “I think our laws are antiquated and we need to fix them and create legislation that fits modern day.” Sit down and talk Ruben Garcia is director of Annunciation House in El Paso, an organization that serves migrants. He told Lavandera lawmakers must acknowledge the changing nature of migrants. “Right now the state and federal government are fighting each other,” Garcia said. “One of the reasons we are facing moments like this is because our political leadership does not sit down and work out comprehensive reform that takes into account the phenomenon of refugees.” Democratic Rep. Andrew Espaillat of New York, himself a formerly undocumented immigrant, said the US fell “asleep at the wheel” over the past decade as countries elsewhere in the Western Hemisphere faltered. “The hemisphere is facing a crisis of democracy,” he said, noting that migrants are fleeing regimes in Venezuela, Nicaragua and Cuba, as well as violence and natural disaster. “We have to address what is going on in the hemisphere,” he said.
CNN — The Department of Homeland Security has rescinded a Trump-era policy limiting entry of undocumented immigrants at legal ports of entry and released new guidance on the process, according to a recently-released memo. Migrants seeking asylum can present at ports of entry to make their claim, but under the Trump administration, DHS put in place policies limiting the processing of undocumented immigrants, including asylum seekers, at ports. The practice, known as “metering,” essentially created a waitlist to allow people to enter only if the department had the capacity to process and detain them at one of its facilities. The latest memo, dated November 1, rescinds that policy, but migrants could still be expelled under a Trump-era public health order allowing the swift removal of migrants encountered at the US-Mexico border. “This memo formally rescinds the Trump Administration’s ‘metering’ policy, which was used to turn back asylum seekers trying to enter ports of entry (POE). The new guidance lays out a vision for the lawful, orderly processing of individuals applying for asylum at POEs. Among other improvements, CBP is directed to accelerate ongoing efforts to digitize processing at POEs and more effectively use data to increase throughput,” US Customs and Border Protection said in a statement. Limiting entry of asylum seekers at legal ports of entry under the previous administration fielded criticism from immigrant advocates and attorneys who argued it denied asylum seekers the right to pursue their claims. A 2020 Homeland Security inspector general report also found that CBP staff turned away asylum seekers at some ports of entry and in some cases, that led asylum seekers and other undocumented immigrants to cross the US-Mexico border illegally. The Monday memo, from acting CBP Commissioner Troy Miller, now directs Office of Field Operations management along the US southern border “to consider and take appropriate measures, as operationally feasible, to increase capacity to process undocumented noncitizens at Southwest Border POEs, including those who may be seeking asylum and other forms of protection.” It also notes that other priorities, like facilitating trade, should be considered when processing undocumented immigrants. Those measures could include using a mobile application where undocumented immigrants can submit information and collaborating with non-governmental organizations and other partners. Port of entries “must strive to process all travelers, regardless of documentation status, who are waiting to enter, as expeditiously as possible, based on available resources and capacity,” the memo reads. DHS is also preparing to reopen the nation’s land borders for Covid-19 vaccinated foreign nationals next week after travel was restricted due to the coronavirus.
CNN — More than 1 million migrants have been arrested after illegally crossing the US-Mexico border since last October, according to two US Department of Homeland Security officials, surpassing the 2019 border crisis tally with three months still left in the fiscal year. The Biden administration has been bracing for a high number of arrests along the US southern border since early this year. In March, Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas estimated that the US was “on pace to encounter more individuals on the southwest border than we have in the last 20 years.” Sleeping quarters set up inside Exhibit Hall B for migrant children are shown during a tour of the Long Beach Convention Center on April 22, 2021 in in Long Beach, California. Long Beach officials and officials with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services led the tour. Migrant children found at the border without a parent were scheduled to be temporarily housed at the facility beginning today. Officials say the center can accommodate up to 1,000 children. Brittany Murray/Pool/Getty Images Biden administration to close some emergency shelters for unaccompanied migrant children Federal border officials have not yet released its June arrest numbers, but they have said encounters for the fiscal year have already hit 1 million when those are taken into account. While the number of border arrests remains high, many of those apprehended are repeat crossers as a result of a pandemic-related policy. Customs and Border Protection declined to comment on preliminary data until the official monthly numbers are released. The 1 million figure was first reported by Reuters. The Biden administration has continued to rely on a public health authority, known as Title 42, that was put in place last year allowing border authorities to swiftly turn back migrants apprehended at the border. Unaccompanied children are not subject to the policy. In June, more than 6,300 people on average have been encountered crossing the border every day, according to one official, citing the 21-day average. Mayorkas defended the administration’s expulsions at the border, saying it is a matter of public health policy. “We will discontinue it as soon as the public health facts and data require,” he told CNN en Español on Monday.
CNN Business — A backlog of US green card applications has Silicon Valley giants calling on the Biden administration for new measures to keep adult children of high-skilled immigrant workers from being deported. Tech titans led by Google (GOOG (GOOG)) and including Amazon (AMZN) (AMZN), IBM (IBM) (IBM (IBM)), Salesforce (CRM), Twitter (TWTR) (TWTR) and Uber (UBER (UBER)) sent a letter to the Department of Homeland Security on Monday urging the agency to extend the immigration benefits of green card applicants to the applicants’ children who are turning 21. Those children should be allowed to stay in the US and be eligible to work, the letter said. “The children of many long-term nonimmigrant workers face tremendous obstacles staying united with their families in the U.S. due to the ever-growing immigrant visa backlogs and archaic rules that punish them for merely growing up,” the letter read. Without intervention, as many as 200,000 children in the United States risk “aging out” of their parents’ immigration status and face having to enter the immigration system as adults themselves, the companies wrote to Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas. The situation creates uncertainty for many of the tech industry’s most valuable employees and “prevents our companies from attracting and retaining critical talent in the U.S.,” the letter said. In a statement, a DHS spokesperson said Mayorkas supports “bipartisan legislation that offers a permanent pathway to citizenship for documented Dreamers. DHS is working to maximize the number of employment-based green cards that will be issued in FY22 to ensure documented Dreamers are able to gain residency in the United States before they turn 21. DHS continues to review all immigration-related policies, procedures, and regulations to protect the most vulnerable, increase access to eligible immigration benefits, and break down barriers in the immigration system.” Tech companies, who rely heavily on foreign-born engineering talent, have long advocated for policies that encourage high-skilled immigration to the U.S. Monday’s letter reflects the latest in that approach, highlighting how America’s years-long struggle to address immigration issues is increasingly leading to new challenges for visa-holders whose children are growing up. Citing the tight labor market and the ongoing pandemic, the companies argued that the Biden administration’s failure to step in would result in hardship for families as well as harm to America’s technological competitiveness. “Immigrants have been vital to Google’s success, and companies like ours need to attract and retain high-skilled workers from all over the world to compete,” said Karan Bhatia, Google’s VP of government affairs and policy, in a statement to CNN. “Unfortunately, the current immigration system often fails to adequately provide for H-1B Visa holders and their families …. We are joining other companies across the U.S. in advocating for more robust aging out policies so that the children of long-term visa holders can continue to live and work in the United States, pending green card applications even after they turn 21.”
CNN — The US is on track to encounter more than 2 million migrants at the US-Mexico border by the end of the fiscal year, according to internal government estimates reviewed by CNN, marking a record high. The projections could be subject to change in the event of policy modifications or other changes in Latin America. US Border Patrol encounters are also expected to be largely made up of single adults, who are being turned away at the US southern border as soon as they’re encountered under a public health order, and as a result, might also account for repeat crossers. But combined, the data – based on preliminary reporting as of this month – illustrates the continuing challenge for the Biden administration, which has already faced a series of hurdles on the US-Mexico border, particularly with unaccompanied children and migrant families. Undocumented immigrants walk along the U.S.-Mexico border wall after they ran across the shallow Rio Grande into El Paso on March 17, 2021 in Ciudad Juarez, Mexico. John Moore/Getty Images CBP deploying more agents to US-Mexico border amid influx of migrants Data reviewed by CNN shows that up to 1.1 million single adults are expected through September, along with up to around 828,000 families and more than 200,000 unaccompanied children. Border Patrol encounters are expected to continue to rise month-by-month, according to the projections, which can vary. The last time Border Patrol apprehensions surpassed 1 million was in fiscal year 2006, according to publicly available data from Customs and Border Protection. Border Patrol arrests also climbed during the 2019 border crisis, but fell short of 900,000. Deputy Chief of the Border Patrol Raul Ortiz told reporters Tuesday that the agency expects to encounter more than a million migrants this fiscal year. Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas also warned of the uptick in mid-March, saying: “We are on pace to encounter more individuals on the southwest border than we have in the last 20 years. We are expelling most single adults and families. We are not expelling unaccompanied children.” CNN reached out to the Department of Homeland Security. Customs and Border Protection pointed to Ortiz’s comments. It’s difficult to compare today’s situation with those of recent years because of the drastically different circumstances, in part relating to the coronavirus pandemic. There are several factors at play – including deteriorating conditions in Latin America, pent-up demand to enter the US and a perceived relaxation of enforcement under President Joe Biden – that are driving migrants to the border at what appears to be an accelerated pace. The administration is also relying on a public health law known as Title 42 that was invoked under former President Donald Trump and allows border authorities to turn back migrants encountered at the US-Mexico border, either to Mexico or their country of origin. Unaccompanied children are not subject to the policy. These projections could also include a high number of people crossing the border twice or multiple times. In February, around 25% of people encountered at the border had crossed more than once, up from 7% for all fiscal year 2019, the most recent annual data available. “We are seeing higher than usual recidivism rates, as a result of COVID protocols. So the number of encounters, while they impact our operations at Border Patrol, they also can seem to overstate the migrant flows that we are seeing,” a CBP official said earlier this month. In his first news conference, Biden noted that fluctuations in migration flows are common. “It happens every single, solitary year: There is a significant increase in the number of people coming to the border in the winter months of January, February, March. That happens every year,” he said. Biden also said his administration is in discussions with Mexico to have the country receive migrant families expelled by the US under the pandemic-related policy, indicating the pressure the US is placing on Mexico to help stem the flow of migration to the US. “Mexico is refusing to take them back. They’re saying they won’t take them back – not all of them,” Biden said, when asked why some families weren’t being returned. “We’re in negotiations with the President of Mexico. I think we’re going to see that change. They should all be going back. All be going back. The only people we’re not going to let sitting there on the other side of the Rio Grande by themselves with no help are children.” Families from Mexico and the Northern Triangle countries are sent back to Mexico unless the country does not have the capacity to receive them, the Department of Homeland Security said in a statement this month. If Mexico won’t take the families, they are processed into the US. Measures taken in conjunction with Mexico and other Latin American countries could help the administration as it faces an ongoing influx of migrants. But it’s still likely to be a pressing challenge for officials, as evidenced by the growing number of children. Over recent days, the Health and Human Services Department, which is charged with the care of migrant children, announced a string of new facilities, leaning on convention centers, military sites and influx shelters to accommodate children. But even as those beds come online, more children are being encountered daily along the border, leading to overcrowding in border facilities. “What bogs us down is the fact that we’re having to take care of 1,200 kids. We’re already done. We already completed the Border Patrol process, so if HHS would be able to take these kids off of our hands then it would be better for everybody,” acting Executive Officer for Rio Grande Valley Operational Programs Division Oscar Escamilla told reporters during a tour of a temporary border facility Tuesday. “We’re not in the business of dentition. We’re forced into the business because we can’t turn them over to anybody,” he added. CNN’s Geneva Sands contributed to this report.
CNN — US citizens who are sponsoring family members to come to the United States are seeking to intervene in a case over a key immigration program that’s been challenged in court by several Republican-led states. At the center of the case is the so-called humanitarian parole program that provides a way for migrants from Nicaragua, Venezuela, Haiti, and Cuba seeking to come to the US to do so without taking the dangerous journey to the US-Mexico border. Among the requirements migrants must meet is obtaining a sponsor in the US. Migrants cross after midnight into Canada at Roxham Road, an unofficial crossing point from New York State to Quebec for asylum seekers, in Champlain, New York, U.S. March 25, 2023.REUTERS/Christinne Muschi Christinne Muschi/Reuters Asylum-seeking Haitian family makes last-minute dash over northern border as US, Canada begin restricting illegal migrant crossings “I want my family members to have the same chance I was given,” Valerie Laveus, a Florida schoolteacher, told CNN. Laveus, who’s one of the seven intervenors, is trying to bring her brother and nephew who are living in dangerous conditions in Haiti to the United States. The use of the humanitarian parole program has become a key part of the Biden administration’s broader strategy to try to stem the flow of migrants to the US southern border. President Joe Biden has repeatedly touted the program and attributed a recent drop in border crossings to it, among other efforts. “Since we created dedicated pathways in the United States, the number of migrants arriving on our southern border has dropped precipitously,” Biden said during his visit to Canada earlier this month. But in late January, Republican-led states filed a lawsuit against the humanitarian parole program, arguing that the administration exceeded its authority in its use of the program and requesting the court block it. The Justice Department is expected to defend the program. Now, US citizens who are sponsoring family members, among others, to come to the United States under the program are getting involved in the case to “defend their interests in the humanitarian and public benefits of the programs,” the filing says. On Wednesday, the Justice Action Center – along with RAICES and UCLA’s Center for Immigration Law and Policy – submitted a court filing on behalf of the seven citizens. Video Ad Feedback Cuban migrants successfully reach US using motorized hang glider 00:31 - Source: CNN “We wanted to illustrate how these programs are being used by ordinary Americans in the United States,” said Esther Sung, legal director at Justice Action Center. “All of these programs, I think, are pretty unique in modern day immigration policy in that they allow the American public to interact with the immigration system in a way that people otherwise wouldn’t. I think our intervenors demonstrate the breadth and range of types of people who can and want to engage with the immigration system,” Sung added. Laveus told CNN she was optimistic about the program when it was announced by the Biden administration after grappling with numerous delays in trying to obtain a visa for her relatives in Haiti. “When [the program] came out, it gave us a big light of hope because we saw an opportunity for them to come and be here and be safe. It’s heart wrenching to have a part of you not safe,” she said. President Joe Biden arrives to deliver remarks on March 15, 2023 in Las Vegas, Nevada. Ethan Miller/Getty Images/FILE US and Canada reach a deal on decades-old asylum agreement Other intervenors include Francis Arauz, who’s trying to reunite with her Nicaraguan husband; Eric Sype who plans to sponsor a friend from Nicaragua; and Nan Langowitz who’s sponsoring family members of a Venezuelan human rights advocate. The Biden administration, facing shifting migration patterns in the Western hemisphere, has increasingly relied on parole to admit eligible migrants to the United States and drive down border crossings. The US has committed to accepting up to 30,000 migrants per month from Nicaragua, Cuba, Haiti, and Venezuela – who have been arriving in larger numbers – under the parole program, while turning back those who cross the border unlawfully under a Covid-era border restriction. “Let me assure you that we are indeed trying to prevent unlawful entries at our southern border,” Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas told lawmakers Wednesday during a House panel hearing, calling the humanitarian parole program “extraordinarly successful.”
Editor’s Note: Tim Kane is the president of the American Lyceum and a visiting fellow at the Hoover Institution. His most recent book is “The Immigrant Superpower.” The views expressed in this commentary are his own. View more opinion on CNN. CNN — How many times has the Biden White House had an unresolved conflict between idealism and pragmatism on the issue of immigration? How many times has it hesitated to take action, opting instead for political messaging? The sad answer to both questions is: every time. Tim Kane Courtesy Tim Kane Most of the officials appointed by President Joe Biden to work on immigration have resigned in frustration, according to a bombshell report from The New York Times in April. “The White House has been divided by furious debates over how – and whether – to proceed in the face of a surge of migrants crossing the southwest border,” the report said. Some wanted more openness to immigrants of all kinds. Others wanted a coherent set of rules to be applied to the millions of people at the border. And some others wanted a compromise with Republicans to create a new merit-based, green-card system. They all got nothing. Rather than make a policy choice, too often this White House plays politics. Early on, last year, it engaged in a rhetorical word game whether a crisis even existed. It blocked Cubans fleeing communism while allowing in just over 1 million individuals who crossed the border illegally. It blamed everything on the Trump administration, while pretending Barack Obama’s executive actions hadn’t led to an explosion of families and minors crossing the border. Worst of all, the Biden administration reflexively points to “root causes” of poverty and violence, even though those conditions have been dramatically improving for a decade across Central America. Martha's Vineyard, a small island off the coast of Massachusetts, is known as an affluent vacation spot. Erica Lee/CNN What Martha's Vineyard tells us about immigration Meanwhile, the border surge grew exponentially worse. A new report from the Department of Homeland Security for August confirmed over 2 million border apprehensions and expulsions this year so far. Previously, the United States only experienced more than 1 1/2 million apprehensions a few times in its history: during the late 1990s and then 2021. At the current pace, that record could be doubled by the end of this year. And next year, if no policies change, it could double again. Some advocates ask why this is a problem. Immigrants make America stronger, right? As the author of “The Immigrant Superpower,” I agree in principle while also cautioning that flimsy standards mixed with unenforced rules is a recipe for chaos. Legal immigrants add brains, brawn and bravery to America. First- and second-generation immigrants have been awarded 20% of the US military’s Medals of Honor. Furthermore, immigrants tend to be more patriotic toward America and passionate about the American dream than the native-born. In contrast, open border chaos increases human trafficking and drug trafficking. It turns what should be a foreign policy strength into a national security weakness. When we ponder what Biden should do to address the immigration mess at the border, the honest answer is: something, anything. Because the status quo of playing politics while seemingly ignoring policy is not only politically divisive, it’s also missing a golden opportunity. To be sure, there is a partisan gap, but focusing on that ignores a surprising fact. More American voters of all types – Democrats, Republicans and independents alike – support increased immigration than in past decades. Gallup polls going back decades confirm this rarely reported trend. Biden should take advantage of his moment in history to boldly reform American refugee policy. He could, at the stroke of a pen, redefine how many refugees are allowed into the United States by taking advantage of the distinction our laws make between those granted temporary protection and those awarded permanent residency. The latter group is the traditional way “refugees” are categorized: given green cards and a pathway to naturalized citizenship. Naturalization (not immigration) is a congressional authority, according to Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution. However, foreign policy and the granting of temporary welcome to foreign refugees is entirely in the President’s power. He should use that power now. Florida Governor Ron DeSantis speaks after the primary election for the midterms during the "Keep Florida Free Tour" at Pepin's Hospitality Centre in Tampa, Florida, U.S., August 24, 2022. Octavio Jones/Reuters DeSantis chose Martha's Vineyard for a reason A green card and the right to US citizenship allows access to expensive welfare benefits that temporary protection status does not. That’s why redefining refugees as exclusively temporary noncitizens would be a game changer. Anyone who worries that untold millions of temporary refugees would overwhelm the nation should appreciate that some 200 million foreigners visited America annually as business, education and tourism travelers before Covid-19. Context for those millions is the paltry 200,000 total refugees admitted to the United States from Europe during Hitler’s rule in Germany, amounting to fewer than 20,000 per year. This year, a hundred times more people are being apprehended at America’s southwest border, many claiming asylum from Honduras. At the same time, Honduras is receiving “$164.7 million per year” in foreign aid from the United States, according to the State Department. This is wrong. Hondurans should be given refuge, or their government should be given aid, but not both. Stay up to date... Sign up for our new newsletter.Join us on Twitter and Facebook Real tyranny is alive and well, and we shouldn’t confuse it with poverty. The communist government in Beijing is creating a state of surveillance, replete with reeducation camps. Nearly 7 million Venezuelans have fled President Nicolás Maduro’s dictatorship and are hiding in neighboring countries. Twelve million or more Ukrainians have been displaced by the Russian invasion. It’s not as if genuine refugees are hard to find. Why not call a dictatorship a dictatorship? The President should put the world on notice by ordering the State Department to designate “oppressive” nations – and only their people could qualify for asylum. Such a bold move would resolve the border crisis and align with Biden’s stated values. Too simple? No, the world needs moral clarity more than ever.
CNN — The leaders of two US immigration agencies issued new guidance Monday ordering staff to end the use of terms such as “illegal alien” and “assimilation,” according to two officials, words that immigration advocates had criticized as dehumanizing. A pair of memos issued Monday from Tae Johnson and Troy Miller, the acting heads of Immigration and Customs Enforcement and Customs and Border Protection, outlined the updated language for all external and internal communications to align with the Biden administration’s guidance regarding immigration terminology. The terms “alien” will be replaced with “noncitizen” or “migrant,” “illegal alien” with “undocumented noncitizen” or “undocumented individual,” and “assimilation” will change to “integration,” according to the memos. “We enforce our nation’s laws while also maintaining the dignity of every individual with whom we interact. The words we use matter and will serve to further confer that dignity to those in our custody,” the memo from Miller states. ICE told CNN in a statement that the agency was “adopting terminology to help rebuild public trust and reshape the agency image. The change reflects ICE’s commitment to treat everyone with whom we interact with respect and dignity while still enforcing our nation’s laws.” Press releases from the two agencies had previously referred to undocumented immigrants as “aliens.” The Washington Post first reported on the change. The formal terminology change comes on the heels of the Trump administration’s hardline immigration policies. The term “alien” was often invoked by President Donald Trump in speeches as he warned of what he saw as the dangers of unchecked illegal immigration. Immigrant rights advocates have long decried the term “illegal alien” as a dehumanizing slur, and it became even more of a lightning rod during the Trump era – with some top federal officials encouraging its use and several states and local governments taking up measures to ban it. Officials in the past have pointed to the term’s prevalence in US laws to defend their word choices. President Joe Biden has sought to take deliberate steps to recognize America as “a nation of immigrants,” including in his proposed immigration overhaul, his administration has said. The Biden administration is continuing to grapple with an influx of migrants at the southern border. The number of unaccompanied minor children in US Customs and Border Protection custody, an agency not intended to care for children for prolonged periods of time, reached dramatic highs throughout the month of March. In a notable shift over the weekend, Biden described the influx of migrant children on the southern border as a “crisis” – a term that top administration officials have refused to use, instead calling the situation a “challenge.” The White House sought to walk back the President’s comments Monday, claiming Biden was referring to the conditions in Northern Triangle countries that migrants are coming from and not the surge of migrant children in US custody. The Biden administration isn’t alone in drawing attention to the language used to characterize immigration. Former President George W. Bush on Sunday called on Congress to tone down the “harsh rhetoric” on immigration, adding that he hopes that doing so will “set a tone that is more respectful” of immigrants and lead to reform. “I do want to say to Congress, please put aside all of the harsh rhetoric about immigration, please put aside trying to score political points on either side. I hope I can help set a tone that is more respectful about the immigrant, which may lead to reform of the system,” Bush told Norah O’Donnell on “CBS Sunday Morning.” This story has been updated with additional details Monday. CNN’s Betsy Klein, Catherine E. Shoichet, Nicky Robertson and Chandelis Duster contributed to this report.
Washington
CNN — The Supreme Court held on Monday that the government can block non-citizens who are in the US under a program that temporarily protects them from deportation in certain situations from applying for a green card if they entered the country unlawfully. Justice Elena Kagan wrote for a unanimous court. “Today’s decision is not just a setback for those immigrants currently in Temporary Protected Status who did not enter the United States lawfully; it also reinforces the barriers that Dreamers would face until and unless Congress provides a statutory path to some kind of permanent lawful status,” said Steve Vladeck, CNN Supreme Court analyst and professor at the University of Texas School of Law. “The Executive Branch may have some authority to confer forms of temporary legal status on those who crossed the border without permission, but the Supreme Court today reinforced, however indirectly, that only Congress can provide a permanent answer,” he added. The case concerns Jose Sanchez and Sonia Gonzales, a New Jersey couple who came to the US illegally in 1997 and 1998 and now have four children. Their youngest was born in the US and is a citizen. Following a series of earthquakes in El Salvador in 2001, they applied for and received Temporary Protected Status, which shields foreign nationals present in the US from removal if they have been subject to armed conflicts or environmental disasters in their homeland. In 2014, the couple sought to apply to “adjust” their status to become lawful permanent residents and apply for a green card. The US Citizenship and Immigration Services denied their application, noting that they were ineligible to apply because they had not entered the country legally and never been formally admitted to the US. The case confronted two sections of immigration law: one that says that those in TPS should be considered as “maintaining lawful status,” and another that says in order to adjust status, an individual in TPS must have been admitted lawfully. Kagan said that the conferral of TPS status does not make an unlawful entrant like Sanchez eligible for a green card. Kagan said that there was “no dispute” that Sanchez entered the US “unlawfully, without inspection.” She said that a “straightforward” application of immigration law supports the government’s decision to deny him status as a lawful permanent resident because he was not lawfully admitted. “He therefore cannot become a permanent resident of this country,” Kagan concluded. Currently, there are about 400,000 people with TPS status in the country and 85,000 have managed to adjust status. Although a district court ruled in favor of the couple, an appeals court reversed. It held that TPS does not “constitute an admission.” In court, Amy M. Saharia, a lawyer for Jose and Sonia Gonzales, argued that having been admitted is “inherent” in the TPS status. But Michael R. Huston, assistant to the US solicitor general, drew a line between status and admission, arguing against the couple. The government said that while Congress had made some individuals eligible to adjust their status if they met certain criteria and had a sponsor, it was not available to those who had not made a lawful entry. Huston said the government had “reasonably determined” that Congress did not “establish TPS as a special pathway to permanent residents for non-citizens who are already barred from that privilege because of pre-TPS conduct.” He urged the court to defer to the position taken by the agency in the case and he noted that there are “tens of thousands” of TPS holders who have adjusted their status, but they had been lawfully admitted as a student or an au pair or a temporary worker. He said that TPS holders know that it is a temporary form of relief from removal and that it “will not last forever.” At an early point in the case, the Trump administration had argued that those in the TPS program could never try to get green cards. The Biden administration’s position leaves open the opportunity for the government to change its mind. This story has been updated with additional details. CNN’s Devan Cole contributed to this report.
CNN — Migrant crossings along the United States’ southern border are rising, reaching more than 8,000 apprehensions on Monday, according to a Department of Homeland Security official, straining federal resources and overwhelming already-crowded facilities. In May, ahead of the expiration of the Covid-era restriction known as Title 42, US Customs and Border Protection encountered more than 8,000 people daily and had around 25,000 migrants in custody, raising alarm within the Biden administration. But after Title 42 expired, numbers dropped dramatically – with daily border arrests hovering around 3,500 – as the administration levied consequences against those who crossed the border illegally. But crossings are ticking up again amid ongoing mass migration across the Western hemisphere. The latest number of daily encounters paints a grim outlook for the fall as President Joe Biden ramps up his reelection campaign and Republicans continue to hammer the administration over its handling of border crossings. Migrants board Border Patrol vans on the US-Mexico border in El Paso, Texas, on May 11, 2023. Patrick T. Fallon/AFP/Getty Images/FILE Border authorities separated some migrant families amid overcrowding in facilities, report says On Monday, Border Patrol apprehended more than 8,000 migrants, according to the DHS official, who added many of those crossing are families. Migrant families pose a unique set of challenges for officials. Late last week, a court filing revealed one of those challenges when an independent court monitor found that, in rare cases, children were temporarily separated from their parents while in processing because of crowded holding areas. Deteriorating conditions in Latin America that were exacerbated by the coronavirus pandemic have contributed to people wanting to migrate to the United States. The number of migrants crossing the treacherous Darién Gap – which connects Panama and Colombia and has recently served as a barometer for movement in the region – broke a record in 2023: According to immigration officials in Panama, 248,901 people crossed the jungle in 2023, and of those, approximately 20% are children and adolescents.
CNN — A new surge of migrants at the US-Mexico border has placed immense pressure on federal resources and tested President Joe Biden’s border policies only months after going into place, prompting fresh criticism from Republicans and concern within the administration over a politically delicate issue. Biden has been plagued by issues on the border since his first months in office when the US faced a surge of unaccompanied migrant children that caught officials flatfooted. Over the last two years, his administration has continued to face fierce pushback from Republicans – and at times, Democrats – over his immigration policies. That complicated political landscape was put into sharp focus this week when administration officials were forced to contend with images of migrants crossing into the US in large groups, while also heralding a major move that will make hundreds of thousands of Venezuelans already in the US eligible to work, addressing a major sticking point with allies in New York. But the new wave of newcomers – many of whom are from Venezuela – paints a grim outlook for the fall as Biden ramps up his reelection campaign and Republicans continue to hammer the administration over its handling of the border. On Thursday, Biden blasted Republicans in Congress during remarks at the 46th Annual Congressional Hispanic Caucus Institute’s Gala in Washington, DC, saying they “continue to undermine our border security” by blocking bipartisan efforts to pass immigration reform. “We need our colleagues to act – for decades, immigration reform has been bipartisan in this country,” he said. “Unfortunately, MAGA Republicans in Congress spent four years gutting the immigration system under my predecessor,” he added. In the absence of immigration reform, the administration has put in place a patchwork of policies to try to stem the flow of migrants journeying to the US southern border amid unprecedented mass migration in the western hemisphere. Earlier this year, the administration rolled out new and additional avenues for migrants to enter the US legally, like a mobile app, to keep people from crossing unlawfully. They have also stood up centers in the hemisphere to allow migrants to apply to come to the US. But desperation and disinformation from smugglers have prompted migrants to cross anyway. Homeland Security officials are monitoring the situation and while they gave no clear explanation for what prompted the latest surge, they cited poor economies, authoritarian regimes and the climate crisis as forces driving migration. This week, US Border Patrol apprehended more than 8,000 migrants daily, according to two Homeland Security officials. That’s up from around 3,500 daily border arrests after the Covid-era border restriction known as Title 42 expired in May and triggered more severe consequences for people who crossed the border illegally. The Department of Homeland Security has ramped up capacity in border facilities to accommodate the growing number of migrants, as well as continued to conduct deportation flights of migrants deemed ineligible to stay in the United States. US officials are also coordinating with Mexico to try to drive down crossings. Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas is set to travel to the border on Saturday, going to McAllen, Texas, for a meeting with President Xiomara Castro of Honduras. The Department of Defense, for its part, is sending 800 new active-duty personnel to the US-Mexico border, in addition to the 2,500 National Guard members already in place, to provide support to federal authorities. The arrival of migrants at the US southern border also affects inner cities, where asylum seekers usually reside as they go through their immigration proceedings, expanding the scope of the issue for the Biden administration. The administration addressed a major concern among Democrats this week by making more than 472,000 Venezuelans already in the US eligible for Temporary Protected Status, which provides deportation protections and allows them to work in the US. Democratic allies had urged the White House to speed up the ability for Venezuelans to obtain work authorization so they wouldn’t have to rely on social services. “As a result of this decision, immigrants will be temporarily allowed to work, fill needed jobs and support their families while awaiting an asylum determination. The decision will also substantially reduce the cost to New York taxpayers with respect to the sheltering of asylum-seekers,” said Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer and House Democratic Leader Hakeem Jeffries, both of whom are New York Democrats, in a statement.
CNN — Migrant crossings are rising again at the US-Mexico border. Why is this occurring, and what could happen next? To better understand the situation, CNN spoke with Ariel Ruiz Soto, a senior policy analyst at the nonpartisan Migration Policy Institute in Washington. Ruiz says there’s a key detail many debates about migration and the US-Mexico border frequently leave out. “Oftentimes,” he says, “we’re not looking farther south.” Ruiz says it’s likely the number of border crossings will continue to increase, and he says there are three reasons why this is happening right now: 1. There’s been a steep rise in Venezuelans crossing the Darien Gap Data from the Panamanian government shows the number of migrants making the perilous crossing through the Darien Gap is on the rise, Ruiz says. Many of those migrants are from Venezuela, where a socioeconomic crisis – fueled by President Nicolás Maduro’s authoritarian government and worsened by the global pandemic and US sanctions – has led one in four Venezuelans to flee the country since 2015. Video Ad Feedback See part of the journey migrants risk to reach the US 02:43 - Source: CNN Data from the Darien Gap, a treacherous crossing through the jungles of Panama and Colombia, has become an important tool in predicting what we can expect to see at the US-Mexico border. Ruiz describes it as “foreshadowing for the future.” “No matter what the US does today, in five weeks or so, we’re likely going to see the number of migrants from Venezuela rising in the same or higher numbers,” Ruiz says, “unless Mexico increases enforcement or something else happens in the region.” 2. Many migrants have been waiting in Mexico for months US policies at the border changed in May when authorities lifted pandemic-era public health restrictions and put in place new measures aimed at deterring illegal immigration. And data in the immediate aftermath seemed to suggest the deterrent effect was working. But even though the number of apprehensions at the US-Mexico border decreased, Ruiz says data from officials in Mexico and Honduras told a different story. Yes, the number of migrants crossing into the US had decreased. But migrants were still making their way north across Central America and Mexico. “People were migrating,” Ruiz says. “They were just spending more time in Mexico.” Video Ad Feedback U.S. southern border sees surge in migrant crossing 03:07 - Source: CNN Many migrants were waiting “to understand what the policies of the Biden administration post-Title 42” would be, Ruiz says. Both migrants and smugglers keep a close eye on US policies, Ruiz says, and many adjust their plans accordingly. “If smugglers figure out that families are making it through, then more families will come,” he says. And similarly, migrants are more likely to cross in areas along the border where they’ve heard more people have been successful. 3. The number of Mexican migrants has ‘increased notably’ Increases in violence in certain regions of Mexico have also fueled more migration. “More Mexicans are trying to come,” Ruiz says. US government data shows more Mexican families coming to the border, likely to seek asylum, he says. In July 2022, for example, CBP figures indicate 4,000 Mexican family encounters at the border. A year later, that number had more than quadrupled, reaching nearly 22,000. It’s important to remember that a complicated mix of factors fuel migration in the Western Hemisphere, Ruiz says. “These are the three levers that are in play right now. … And regardless of what the Biden administration does today or tomorrow,” he says, “the people that are on the way already are going to continue, unless something else happens in the region.” CNN’s Nick Paton Walsh, Natalie Gallón, Brice Lainé and Carlos Villalón contributed to this report.
CNN — Immigration arrests in the United States have plunged under President Joe Biden compared to his predecessor, who cast a wide net of who was eligible to be taken into custody, according to Immigration and Customs Enforcement data released Friday. Under Biden, the Department of Homeland Security rolled out a series of policy changes that marked a departure from the Trump administration’s aggressive enforcement measures. That included modifying guidance to focus arrests on national security, public safety and border security risks. ICE’s Enforcement and Removal Operations made more than 74,000 administrative arrests – for immigration violations – in fiscal year 2021, according to agency data, down from the Trump administration when annual administrative arrests hovered over 100,000. ICE, under the previous administration, had given officers more latitude to make arrests. Senior ICE officials on Friday emphasized the impact of the pandemic on operations, pointing out the difficulty of comparing the data to past years. “I can’t overemphasize how impactful Covid has been on the agency over this, really the past year and a half, but certainly this fiscal year,” a senior official said, noting shutdowns, and other countries that refused to accept deportations cases. The fiscal year 2021 data encompasses the final months of the Trump administration and the start of the Biden era. Of the total arrests conducted, 45,755 occurred after ICE modified its guidance last February under Biden, newly released data shows. Nearly half of those arrests were of convicted criminals, while 55% of those arrested were classified as “threats to border security,” which includes people apprehended by US Border Patrol. The return to a priority system for arrests was among several policy changes instituted under Biden. Over the last year, ICE also ended contracts with two detention centers, stopped long-term detention of families, discontinued mass worksite immigration raids, and began moving toward alternatives to detention, like ankle bracelets. A senior ICE official told reporters Friday the “focused approach yielded measurable success,” including, for example, a doubling of arrests of aggravated felonies over the prior year. Deportations also dropped dramatically in the first year of the Biden administration. ICE deported around 59,000 last year, down from 185,884 the year before. Overseeing the structural changes is acting ICE Director Tae Johnson, who’s remained at the helm of the agency during the months-long confirmation process for Biden’s pick to lead ICE, Ed Gonzalez. This week, Gonzalez’s confirmation hit a snag after Senate Democrats withdrew a vote to advance his nomination when an alleged domestic complaint surfaced. The White House has said it still stands by Gonzalez, who called the accusations in the complaint false. While immigrant advocates and Democratic lawmakers have welcomed change at ICE, they’ve been critical of the continued use of private detention and access to Covid-19 vaccines for those who are detained. Earlier this month, the American Civil Liberties Union also filed a nationwide class-action lawsuit against ICE, claiming that the federal agency has failed to provide Covid-19 booster vaccines to medically vulnerable detainees.
A version of this story appears in CNN’s What Matters newsletter. To get it in your inbox, sign up here. CNN — America’s duct-taped immigration policy, which successive Republican and Democratic administrations and Congresses have all failed to fix in a comprehensive way, is about to be ripped in yet another direction. With CNN projecting Republicans will take control of the House in January, Democrats want to use the last gasp of their House majority to make good on a yearslong effort to give certainty to hundreds of thousands of undocumented immigrants who were brought to the US as children. Some Republicans, meanwhile, are using the language of war and aiming to make the situation at the southern border a key part of their platform once their party seizes the megaphone of a House majority. A federal judge invalidated a Covid-era policy left over from the Trump administration that has been used to expel migrants millions of times in recent years. US Customs and Border Protection Commissioner Chris Magnus was forced out of his role last week by Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas.
The move will do little to quiet the criticism of Mayorkas by Republicans. They’ve promised to target him and his agency with scrutiny and investigations when they take the House majority next term. ‘Invasion.’ Texas Gov. Greg Abbott, fresh from a commanding election win in last week’s midterms and keen to be viewed as the border security governor, said he would invoke a clause of the US Constitution and declare an “invasion” at the southern border. While he has used the term “invasion” before, his tweet suggested he would do more to militarize his state’s response and step in where he says the Biden administration has failed. Former President Donald Trump also returned to that term – “invasion” – in announcing his latest run for the White House. “Our southern border has been erased,” he said falsely, “and our country is being invaded by millions and millions of unknown people.” Abbott argued his declaration would invoke a clause in the Constitution that gives states extraordinary power. That text, from Article I, Section 10, reads like this: No State shall, without the Consent of Congress, lay any Duty of Tonnage, keep Troops, or Ships of War in time of Peace, enter into any Agreement or Compact with another State, or with a foreign Power, or engage in War, unless actually invaded, or in such imminent Danger as will not admit of delay. That Abbott and others are equating a stream of unarmed migrants with an invading army is a case of major false equivalence. They also point to drugs that come across the border with Mexico and the drug cartels behind the illicit activity as a major problem. There is no invading army. Rather than marauding troops, CNN’s many profiles of migrants have found families fleeing poverty, climate change, persecution and violence, and approaching the US border after a treacherous trek, often on foot, across the Darien Gap linking South and Central America. The Biden administration, following in the Trump administration’s footsteps, has sought to deter migrants, particularly from Venezuela, who have increased exponentially in recent years. Judge ends Title 42. A federal judge on Tuesday ended a Trump-era Covid-19 policy, which had been maintained by the Biden administration, to expel many border crossers from the country. In response to a request from the administration, the judge stayed his ruling Wednesday for five weeks to allow the administration to prepare. The DC judge, Emmet Sullivan, called that policy “arbitrary and capricious” and said it was flawed from the get-go. CNN’s Catherine Shoichet has an in-depth look at the policy, which has been used to expel migrants nearly 2.5 million times under the two presidents over the past three years. That language is important – many of those expelled under the policy have been expelled more than once. Reporting from the Texas border. CNN’s Rosa Flores is based in Texas and has reported from the region. “We’ve covered stories on the Mexican side of the border where thousands of migrants have been waiting for Title 42 to lift,” she told me in an email. “The anxiety and angst have been building on the border for years now.” The uncertainty about US policy has only amplified the desperation of people trying to get into the US, Flores told me. “The net effect of the US immigration policy has been very dangerous for migrants/asylum-seekers,” she told me. “Thousands of them have been kidnapped, sexually assaulted or violently attacked, according to Human Rights First.” ‘PR stunt’. Even hard-line immigration activists, like the former Trump Department of Homeland Security official Ken Cuccinelli, who has pushed for this “invasion” declaration, called Abbott’s version of invoking the invasion clause inadequate since Abbott will not, apparently, be seizing federal authority to expel migrants from the country. It does, however, fit along with Abbott’s efforts to bus migrants out of Texas to cities like New York and Washington. “Saying you’re being invaded but not blocking the invaders from coming is a hollow shell,” Cuccinelli said, along with Russ Vought, president of the activist group Citizens for Renewing America. They dismissed Abbott’s move as a “PR stunt.” No obvious change. Flores pointed out it does not appear that Abbott’s declaration has changed the stance of the Texas Military Department nor its rules of engagement on the border. Abbott’s budget director said the announcement does not reflect a change in overall tactics. Back in February, CNN’s Priscilla Alvarez traveled to the border and talked to National Guard members taking part in Abbott’s previous deployment of state forces to the border. She found some who said the mission was a waste of time and resources, since the power to enforce immigration policy and border security is held by the federal government. Not what the founders intended. Any more on the invasion clause from Abbott would be “flagrantly unconstitutional,” according to Joseph Nunn of the left-leaning Brennan Center for Justice, who pointed out Texas is not being invaded by an army. “The Founders foresaw such invasions being launched by ‘ambitious or vindictive’ foreign powers and groups, not unarmed migrants and asylum-seekers,” Nunn said in a Twitter thread.
CNN — The Biden administration has finalized a rule eliminating potential hurdles for immigrants using some public benefits and trying to obtain legal status, according to a newly released regulation. The Trump administration had modified the decades-old regulation, known as “public charge,” in a way that would have reshaped the legal immigrant population in the United States by making it more difficult for individuals to obtain status if they use public benefits like food stamps and housing vouchers. FILE - A pair of migrant families from Brazil pass through a gap in the border wall to reach the United States after crossing from Mexico to Yuma, Ariz., to seek asylum on June 10, 2021. The National Association of Immigration Judges on Thursday, July 21, 2022, asked the federal government to restore its recognition after the Trump administration stripped its official status, and the system's chief judge resigned after two years on the job. The two developments underscore political uncertainty at a critical time in the Justice Department's Executive Office for Immigration Review, which runs the courts. (AP Photo/Eugene Garcia, File) Eugene Garcia/AP First on CNN: A record number of migrants have died crossing the US-Mexico border The Biden administration, though, is changing course and unwinding the Trump-era policy by largely returning to longstanding practice. “This action ensures fair and humane treatment of legal immigrants and their U.S. citizen family members,” said Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas in a statement. “Consistent with America’s bedrock values, we will not penalize individuals for choosing to access the health benefits and other supplemental government services available to them.” Under current regulations, the term “public charge” is defined as someone who is “primarily dependent” on government assistance, meaning it supplies more than half their income. But it only counted cash benefits, such as the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families program or Supplemental Security Income from Social Security. The Trump administration widened the definition of who is expected to be dependent on the government by including more benefit programs. That change is no longer in effect. Under the final rule, the Department of Homeland Security will consider benefits, like cash assistance for income maintenance under TANF and long-term institutionalization at government expense. Immigration officials can consider an applicant’s financial resources, health, education, skills, family status and age. But few people are rejected on these relatively narrow grounds, experts said. Officials will not consider certain non-cash programs like the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, Children’s Health Insurance Program, Medicaid, or benefits related to housing and immunizations or testing for communicable diseases. At least 140 asylum seekers arrived in New York Sunday on buses in what the New York City Mayor's Office of Immigrant Affairs is calling the largest single-day arrival of migrants from Texas, according to a spokesperson. NYC Immigrant Affairs 'The future is here.' Migrants step off buses from Texas into New York homeless shelters DHS argued in its proposed regulation, issued in February, that changes made in 2019 by the Trump administration had caused a chilling effect within immigrant communities, citing experts, and led to immigrants avoiding benefits like medical care over concerns that use of those benefits might keep them from obtaining legal status. The final rule will go into effect on December 23.
