After attacking Trump's coronavirus-related China travel ban as xenophobic, Dems and media have changed tune Democrats are now blaming President Trump for his reaction time, despite targeting the President for his early coronavirus-related China travel ban in January. Check out how these predominate figures have changed their tune. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. UPDATE, April 21, 2020 at 6:58 p.m. ET: President Trump has clarified that his 60-day immigration pause, at least for now, will apply only to people seeking permanent residence in the United States.Original story below: President Trump announced late Monday he will soon sign an executive order "to temporarily suspend immigration into the United States," in what appeared to be a drastic escalation of his efforts to fight the coronavirus pandemic and boost the economy. The declaration came hours after U.S. equity markets plunged, with oil prices turning negative for the first time in history. Also on Monday, three states -- Georgia, Tennessee, and South Carolina -- revealed plans to begin reopening some businesses. "In light of the attack from the Invisible Enemy, as well as the need to protect the jobs of our GREAT American Citizens, I will be signing an Executive Order to temporarily suspend immigration into the United States!" the president tweeted.The precise contours of the president's planned executive order were not immediately clear. The White House did not immediately elaborate on Trump's tweeted announcement. Politico reported that the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) was still working out the details of the executive order, and that an exemption for temporary guest workers, including farm workers, was under consideration.A top DHS official told the outlet that “22 million unemployed Americans and counting due to COVID-19" had prompted Trump to act. Due to the pandemic, almost all visa processing by the State Department, including immigrant visas, has been suspended for weeks. Rep. Paul Gosar, R-Arizona, applauded the planned executive order, and suggested a total immigration suspension should continue indefinitely. "Thank you, @realDonaldTrump!" he wrote. "All immigration to the United States should halt until every American who wants a job has one!""Given tens of millions of Americans are out of work right now and we’re battling a virus that spreads through human-to-human transmission I am dying to hear one coherent argument against this," wrote Spectator USA's Washington editor Amber Athey.Rep. Don Beyer, D-Va., meanwhile, said Trump was looking for "someone to blame for his own failure." CORONAVIRUS TIMELINE SHOWS MULTIPLE FLIP-FLOPS BY JOURNOS, DEMS, GOP"Immigration has nearly stopped and the US has far more cases than any other country," Beyer wrote, without adjusting his statistic to consider the larger population in the United States. "This is just xenophobic scapegoating."Added Sen. Kamala Harris, D-Calif.: "Trump failed to take this crisis seriously from day 1. His abandonment of his role as president has cost lives. And now, he's shamelessly politicizing this pandemic to double down on his anti-immigrant agenda. Enough, Mr. President. The American people are fed up." Aside from the pending immigration ban, the U.S. has already enacted a slew of entry restrictions. The U.S. recently agreed with both Canada and Mexico to extend border restrictions on nonessential travel for another 30 days, through May 16 and May 19, respectively. However, people with temporary work visas, students and business travelers were exempted, along with emergency personnel.The president has also already has blocked most travel from other hotspots, including most of Europe, Iran, South Korea, and China. AOC CELEBRATES OIL CRASH IN NOW-DELETED TWEETMore than 750,000 Americans have come down with COVID-19 and more than 42,000 have died. On Monday, the U.S. government said it will continue to quickly expel migrants it encounters along the border with Mexico for at least another month in response to the COVID-19 outbreak. Jeanette Vizguerra wears a face mask during a car protest calling for the release of detainees at the GEO Immigration Detention Center because of the dangers posed by the new coronavirus Friday, April 17, 2020, in Denver. (AP Photo/David Zalubowski) Under the U.S. policy change spurred by the virus, the U.S. government has sent some 10,000 Mexicans and Central Americans back to Mexico, according to data from the U.S.Border Patrol. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) says that more than 100 migrants at 25 detention centers have tested positive for COVID-19. Guatemala claims that 44 migrants deported from the U.S. tested positive.Monday's immigration suspension was likely to draw legal challenges, and reignite an already heated debate over travel restrictions. On Jan. 31, Trump issued the "Proclamation on Suspension of Entry as Immigrants and Nonimmigrants of Persons who Pose a Risk of Transmitting 2019 Novel Coronavirus," blocking most travel from China -- and at the time, Democrats harshly criticized the move. Within hours, Joe Biden campaigned in Iowa and told the crowd that Americans “need to have a president who they can trust what he says about it, that he is going to act rationally about it. ... This is no time for Donald Trump’s record of hysteria and xenophobia – hysterical xenophobia – and fearmongering to lead the way instead of science.” Months later, Biden said he supported the China travel ban.Fox News' Andrew O'Reilly and The Associated Press contributed to this report.
Mexico ‘has the upper hand’ against the U.S. over the border: Auden Abello Independent journalist Auden Cabello joins ‘America Reports’ to discuss the White House and Mexico holding a meeting amid the migrant surge. A meeting this week between top U.S. and Mexican officials to discuss the ongoing migrant crisis included talks about "regularizing" illegal immigrants living in the U.S., officials said Thursday — quickly sparking a furious reaction from House Republicans, who called it "unconscionable." Secretary of State Antony Blinken and Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas were among the officials in the U.S. delegation to Mexico City and met with Mexican President Andrés Manuel López Obrador on Wednesday. The meeting came amid a historic crisis at the border, with December on track to shatter records for migrant encounters.In the joint statement, the countries affirmed their commitments to "orderly, humane and regular migration" and stressed their efforts to tackle "root causes" of migration, disrupt human smuggling and promote private investment while also investing in "ambitious development programs" in the region. LIBERAL MAYORS PUSH BIDEN FOR EMERGENCY DECLARATION, ADDITIONAL FUNDING TO DEAL WITH MIGRANT CRISIS But the statement also said that officials discussed the "benefits" of granting some form of legal status for illegal immigrants already in the U.S., including those protected by the 2012 Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) — an executive order signed by President Barack Obama, which shielded some illegal immigrants who arrived in the U.S. as minors. "The delegations also discussed the benefits of regularizing the situation of Hispanic migrants who have been undocumented for several years and the DACA beneficiaries, who are a vital part of the US economy and society," the joint statement said, adding that the delegations will meet again in January. Mexico's President Andrés Manuel López Obrador was part of the meeting with the U.S. delegation on Wednesday. (REUTERS/Raquel Cunha)The Biden administration previously called for a pathway to citizenship for millions of illegal immigrants living in the U.S. when it unveiled its sweeping immigration reform legislation in 2021. The package failed to pick up Republican support, in part due to the inclusion of the amnesty, but the administration has continued to promote it as a solution to the ongoing migrant crisis. In a statement on Thursday, House Speaker Mike Johnson slammed the talk of legalization in the meeting. "At a time when America is experiencing the worst border crisis in our nation’s history, it is unconscionable to hear the Biden Administration’s announcement that Secretaries Mayorkas and Blinken discussed with the President of Mexico amnesty for illegal immigrants," he said. "The United States must focus on policies that deter — not attract — people attempting to come here illegally, and the smugglers who profit from the catastrophe at our border." "This development further demonstrates the Administration has no real intention of solving the humanitarian disaster and immediate national security crisis their policies have created. President Biden needs to stop vacationing and take immediate steps to stop the flow of illegal immigration into our country. Our nation’s security and sovereignty depend upon it, and the American people demand it," he said. With the raging crisis at the southern border, attention in Washington has largely turned to increasing restrictions on asylum. The Biden administration, which has touted its efforts in tackling root causes and expanding "lawful pathways," has also said it is increasing "consequences" for illegal entry, including additional use of expedited removal and a new asylum rule restricting some claims.MIGRANT CRISIS INCREASING STRAIN ON BORDER OFFICIALS, IMMIGRATION COURTS WITH MASSIVE NUMBERS The administration has also requested $14 billion for border funding as part of its supplemental funding request to Congress. Republicans have demanded that the package include restrictions on the use of humanitarian parole and stricter asylum standards — something the administration has reportedly been open to, but which has met with resistance from some Democrats. Some Senate Democrats have previously said that any policy changes at the border would have to be accompanied by a legal pathway for illegal immigrants — although such a demand would likely be a non-starter for many Republicans.NOVEMBER SAW NEARLY QUARTER OF A MILLION MIGRANT ENCOUNTERS AMID NEW BORDER SURGE VideoMeanwhile, Fox News reported this week that during the four-day Christmas weekend, there were more than 35,000 migrant encounters, and since Dec. 1, there have been over 250,000 migrant encounters at the southern border — meaning December could break the monthly record for encounters set in September (269,735). CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP It comes at the end of a record-setting 2023, which has seen records for daily and monthly migrant encounters broken multiple times. Another migrant caravan including thousands of migrants has also been making its way through southern Mexico.Fox News' Griff Jenkins contributed to this report. Adam Shaw is a politics reporter for Fox News Digital, primarily covering immigration and border security.He can be reached at adam.shaw2@fox.com or on Twitter.
Thousands of migrants waiting to be processed by Border Patrol A mass of thousands of migrants in Eagle Pass, Texas, waiting to be processed by Border Patrol after they crossed illegally into the U.S. (Fox News/Bill Melugin) The Immigration Court backlog in the U.S. surpassed three million pending cases last month amid a continued crisis at the Southern Border. The three million pending cases reported in November include one million that were added within the previous 12 months, according to a report from the Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse at Syracuse University.Immigration judges currently average 4,500 pending cases each, TRAC reported. "Previous administrations — all the way back through at least the George W. Bush administration — have failed when they tried to tackle the seemingly intractable problem of the Immigration Court 'backlog.' Recently, however, the accelerating growth in the Court's backlog has transformed the problem into an even more daunting challenge," TRAC's report noted. TEXAS GOV. ABBOTT SIGNS BILL MAKING ILLEGAL IMMIGRATION A STATE CRIME Eagle Pass, Texas, is being flooded with migrants as more than 4,000 illegally crossed on Monday and more than 4,000 were already in custody. (Griff Jenkins/Fox News) During the last quarter, from July to September, the backlog rose by nearly 400,000 cases at an average increase of 130,000 cases per month, according to the report. The monthly growth was even higher in October and November at an average of 140,000 cases per month.In comparison, the backlog in September 2016 was sitting at 516,031 cases, roughly one-sixth of the current total, according to an analysis by TRAC. The 278 immigration judges at the time, during the final fiscal year of the Obama administration, completed an average of around 750 cases each year while the average caseload assigned was 1,850 per judge. The backlog accelerated during the Trump years, the report highlighted. The backlog grew two and a half times more by September 2020, during the final fiscal year of the Trump administration, compared to September 2016. During this time, the number of judges also grew to 484, and average pending caseloads were around 2,600 per judge.The number of new judges hired accelerated during the first three years of the Biden administration, with a total of 682 immigration judges now sitting on the bench. Each judge also closed an average of around 975 cases during the latest fiscal year, a closure rate nearly a third greater than seven years ago during the final year of the Obama administration. MIGRANT ENCOUNTERS AGAIN TOP 10K IN A SINGLE DAY AS LAWMAKERS EYE NEW BORDER LIMITS Thousands of migrants waiting to be processed by Border Patrol in Eagle Pass, Texas. (Bill Melugin/Fox News) CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APPDespite having more judges and higher case closures per judge, the judges still have not been able to keep pace with the number of incoming cases. Because of this, the average caseloads of the 682 judges on the bench have risen to 4,500 per judge.Fox News' Griff Jenkins reported that Eagle Pass, Texas, was overwhelmed with migrants Monday night when more than 4,000 illegally crossed the Southern Border, on top of the more than 4,000 already in custody. Video footage obtained by Fox News' Bill Melugin showed thousands of migrants in Eagle Pass waiting to be processed by Border Patrol after they crossed illegally on Monday.Fox News' Griff Jenkins and Bill Melugin contributed to this report.
Lawrence Jones visits southern border to see crisis firsthand ‘Fox & Friends’ co-host Lawrence Jones on what he witnessed at the Texas-Mexico border ahead of the arrival of DHS Secretary Mayorkas, who is facing an impeachment probe. Join Fox News for access to this content Plus get unlimited access to thousands of articles, videos and more with your free account! Please enter a valid email address. By entering your email, you are agreeing to Fox News Terms of Service and Privacy Policy, which includes our Notice of Financial Incentive. To access the content, check your email and follow the instructions provided. Mexican President Andrés Manuel Lopez Obrador issued a lengthy series of demands detailing what the U.S. must offer in exchange for Mexico's help in stemming the flow of migrants to the U.S.-Mexico border. Lopez Obrador's demands came during a Friday press conference, which came roughly a week after he met with Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas and Secretary of State Antony Blinken in Mexico City in late December. The U.S. officials requested that Mexico boost its assistance in stopping illegal immigration.Lopez Obrador responded by demanding the U.S. give $20 billion to Latin American and Caribbean countries, grant work visas to 10 million Hispanics who have worked in the U.S. for at least 10 years, end sanctions against Venezuela and halt the blockade of Cuba. The negotiations come at a critical time for President Biden, whose polling numbers on illegal immigration have been low throughout his presidency. The U.S. also suffered a surge of migrants at the border this fall, with roughly 240,000 monthly migrant encounters at the border in late 2023. MEXICO'S AMLO INTENSIFIES ANTI-GOP MEDDLING WITH NEW ATTACK ON TEXAS GOV ABBOTT Mexican President Lopez Obrador issued a lengthy series of demands during a Friday press conference detailing what the U.S. must offer in exchange for Mexico's help in stemming the flow of migrants to the U.S.-Mexico border. A senior Biden administration official responded to those demands in a statement to NBC News, saying Lopez Obrador "has a very ambitious agenda. For some of these things, we would need Congress to act. We share the vision that we need to lift up the region."Lopez Obrador has proven more than willing to challenge U.S. politicians on immigration issues. He picked a fight with Texas Gov. Greg Abbott over one of that state's new immigration laws last month. MIGRANT ENCOUNTERS AT BORDER SOAR PAST THE 200K MARK IN DECEMBER, WITH OVER A WEEK STILL TO GOThe new legislation allows law enforcement to arrest illegal immigrants who would then face the choice to leave the U.S. or be prosecuted on misdemeanor charges for illegal entry. Migrants who do not comply could face arrest again and more serious felony charges. Abbott said the bill aims to stop a "tidal wave" of illegal immigration. The negotiations come at a critical time for President Biden, whose polling numbers on illegal immigration have been low throughout his presidency. (Chris Kleponis/CNP/Bloomberg via Getty Images) "The Texas governor acts that way because he wants to be the Republican vice presidential candidate and wants to win popularity with these measures," Lopez Obrador said in late December. "He’s not going to win anything. On the contrary, he is going to lose support because there are a lot of Mexicans in Texas, a lot of migrants." MEXICAN PRESIDENT RAMPS UP ANTI-REPUBLICAN RHETORIC, URGES HISPANICS NOT TO GIVE DESANTIS ‘ANY VOTES’The Mexican Foreign Ministry also previously filed a complaint against Texas over the construction of buoys set up by the state in the Rio Grande. It had also sought to link the deaths of two migrants in the river to the buoys. The Mexican Foreign Ministry also filed a complaint against Texas this year over the construction of buoys set up by the state in the Rio Grande. It had also sought to link the deaths of two migrants in the river to the buoys. (Brandon Bell/Getty Images)In July, Lopez Obrador urged Hispanics not to vote for Abbott in response to the buoys. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP"We don't have to do much, just tell our compatriots not to vote for the governor of Texas or for lawmakers of the Republican Party who support these measures," he said at the time.Fox News' Adam Shaw contributed to this report Anders Hagstrom is a reporter with Fox News Digital covering national politics and major breaking news events. Send tips to Anders.Hagstrom@Fox.com, or on Twitter: @Hagstrom_Anders.
US officials are overwhelmed by illegal immigration Fox News White House correspondent Peter Doocy has the latest on President Joe Biden's agenda on 'Special Report.' FIRST ON FOX: The number of illegal immigrants who entered the U.S. since President Biden took office will cost the U.S. taxpayer over $20 billion each year, according to a new analysis by a hawkish immigration group. The study by the Federation for American Immigration Reform (FAIR), which advocates for lower levels of immigration overall, calculates that the illegal immigrants who have entered the U.S. since Jan. 2021 will add an extra $20.4 billion burden a year, in addition to the $140 billion existing illegal immigrants already cost.The analysis is based on an estimated 1.3 million released into the U.S. by immigration officials, as well as approximately one million "gotaways" -- or illegal immigrants who have slipped past overwhelmed agents. FAIR calculates that each illegal immigrants costs $9,232 a year to support. The U.S. has been in the midst of a massive border crisis since early 2021, with more than 1.7 million migrant encounters in FY 2021, and more than two million in FY 2022 so far. While many of those encounters are repeat encounters, and nearly half are removed under Title 42 public health protections, a considerable number are released into the U.S. for asylum hearings. NUMBER OF ILLEGAL MIGRANTS WHO ENTERED US SINCE BIDEN TOOK OFFICE APPROACHING TWO MILLION Migrants get off bus Wednesday morning in New York City. (Fox News ) DHS sources told Fox News that there have been more than 500,000 "gotaways" into the U.S. this fiscal year until July, making at least 900,000 gotaways in FY 21 and 22.FAIR, which calls for stricter border controls as part of a range of broader immigration reforms, laid out the money the estimated $20.4 billion could be spent on instead -- including providing every homeless veteran in the U.S. $50K a year for the next 10 years. The money, the analysis says, could also hire 330,000 teachers, fund and expand the National School Lunch Program, provide Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program benefits to more than 7 million extra families or provide every family earning less than $50K a year a $410 grocery voucher.It could also construct the entire wall at the southern border -- a project that began under the Trump administration. KAMALA HARRIS DECLARES ‘BORDER IS SECURE’ AS THOUSANDS OF ILLEGALS FLOOD INTO US EVERY DAY "Even in an age in which trillion dollar spending packages and are considered modest, the additional $20.4 billion the Biden Border Crisis has heaped onto the backs of American taxpayers is still staggering," Dan Stein, president of FAIR, said in a statement. "$20.4 billion could address some very important needs of the American public, instead of covering the costs of the surge of illegal migration triggered by this administration’s policies." VideoThe analysis comes amid continued conservative and Republican criticism of the Biden administration’s border policies -- which they have blamed for fueling the crisis by encouraging migrants to make the journey north. They argue that the policies have made it easier for migrants to enter the U.S. and be released, while simultaneously reducing interior enforcement.The Biden administration has stressed that it is seeking to solve the "root causes" of the crisis, like poverty, violence and corruption in Central America. It has touted additional funding for Homeland Security as well as a recent anti-smuggling operation, while claiming its interior enforcement focuses on immediate threats to public safety and national security. Vice President Kamala Harris, who is leading diplomatic outreach to combat root causes, defended the Biden administration’s policies on Sunday -- and claimed that the border is "secure," while calling for amnesty for millions of illegal immigrants.CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP"I think that there is no question that we have to do what the president and I asked Congress to do, the first request we made: pass a bill to create a pathway to citizenship," Harris said on "Meet the Press." "The border is secure, but we also have a broken immigration system, in particular, over the last four years before we came in, and it needs to be fixed." Fox News’ Jessica Chasmar contributed to this report. Adam Shaw is a politics reporter for Fox News Digital, primarily covering immigration and border security.He can be reached at adam.shaw2@fox.com or on Twitter.
Texas troopers stop smuggling operation across US-Mexico border Texas troopers found 12 illegal immigrants crammed into a pickup truck in Uvalde County. Credit: Texas DPS FIRST ON FOX: A hawkish immigration group is estimating that there are nearly 17 million illegal immigrants currently living in the United States -- and that the number has increased by 16% since President Biden took office in early 2021. The Federation for American Immigration Reform (FAIR), which calls for lower overall levels of immigration, is publishing a new research report on the number of people living illegally in the U.S.That report estimates that there are approximately 16.8 illegal immigrants in the U.S., up from 15.5 million in January 2022. Other groups have put the estimate in recent years at around 11 million, which is the most quoted number. "This estimate is also a 2.3 million increase from our end-of-2020 estimate, meaning the illegal alien population increased 16 percent nationwide during just the first two years of Joe Biden’s presidency," the report says. MIGRANT NUMBERS EXCEEDED 200,000 ENCOUNTERS AGAIN IN MAY AS TITLE 42 EXPIRED Migrants walk into U.S. custody after crossing the border from Mexico, Ciudad Juarez, Wednesday, March 29, 2023, a day after dozens of migrants died in a fire at a migrant detention center in Ciudad Juarez. (AP Photo/Christian Chavez) The Biden administration has been dealing with a migrant crisis now into its third year. It abolished a number of Trump-era policies including border wall construction and the Migrant Protection Protocols (MPP) and has interior ICE enforcement. Deportations plummeted, and Republicans have hammered the administration for expanding "catch-and-release" policies that had largely ended under the Trump administration.FBI TERROR WATCHLIST ARRESTS, ENCOUNTERS AT SOUTHERN BORDER FOR FY 23 HITS ALL-TIME RECORD The administration has countered, arguing that it is rebuilding an asylum system that was destroyed under the prior administration, and more recently has touted tougher enforcement measures at the border alongside expanded legal pathways. There were more than 200,000 encounters at the southern border in May, bringing the overall total of encounters this fiscal year to over 1.6 million so far. The administration said that half of those 204,000 were encountered before the expiration of the Title 42 public health order -- which allowed for the rapid expulsion of migrants due to COVID-19 -- on May 11. Video FAIR’s analysis defines an illegal alien as "any alien who is present in the United States without legal status, like a valid visa or lawful permanent residence." That, therefore also includes those who are protected from deportation -- including recipients of deferred enforced departure, Temporary Protected Status, and those who have been paroled into the U.S. -- who are described in immigration law as "lawfully present" despite a lack of legal status. The administration recently extended TPS for approximately 330,000 nationals from four countries.FAIR acknowledges that accurately estimating the population of illegal immigrants can be murky and inexact, given the size and distribution of the population -- and that many live at least partially in the shadows. Many typical estimates are based on Census Bureau data."In truth, we do not know exactly how many people cross the border illegally and evade immigration authorities, nor can anyone accurately quantify overstays or gotaways. We can only estimate these figures based on changes in annual census data, along with how many individuals CBP and ICE believe slip through undetected," the report says. MAYORKAS LOSES YET ANOTHER DHS OFFICIAL AS DEPUTY WHO HELPED ‘CO-LEAD’ AGENCY RETIRES VideoFAIR uses Census data, applies an estimate that the population is being undercounted by approximately 30%, which it says is consistent with past estimates of nonresponse rates for illegal immigrants -- and then uses increases in the measured foreign-born population "which contain a higher proportion of illegal immigrants than previous years due to inadequate border security and the expansion of dubious immigration parole programs."CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The report argues that the increase has been driven by relaxed border restrictions and a hiring boost post-COVID by U.S. companies as well as Biden policies that have increased "pull factors" drawing migrants north, including the use of parole and greater use of Notices to Appear. It also cites restrictions placed on Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) that are currently being challenged by a lawsuit and have been blocked temporarily. The Biden administration has faulted Republicans in Congress for the ongoing migrant crisis, and has argued that there is a need for a comprehensive immigration bill to fix what it says is a "broken" system.That legislation, first introduced in early 2021, has been rejected by Republicans specifically for the inclusion of a mass pathway to citizenship for millions of illegal immigrants already in the country. Adam Shaw is a politics reporter for Fox News Digital, primarily covering immigration and border security.He can be reached at adam.shaw2@fox.com or on Twitter.
ICE annouces arrest of 171 illegal immigrants in 25 US cities U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) Enforcement and Removal Operations (ERO) officers apprehended 171 unlawfully present noncitizens with pending charges or convictions for murder, homicide or assault against children, officials said. More than 100 illegal immigrants wanted for crimes, including child sexual assault and murder, were arrested nationwide in a major enforcement action, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) announced Thursday. ICE's Enforcement and Removal Operations (ERO) arrested 171 unlawfully present non-citizens in 25 U.S. cities in an operation carried out over a little more than a week, officials said. "Over the course of 11 days, our dedicated and committed law enforcement officers zeroed-in on removable, at-large non-citizens who are wanted for or who have already been convicted of horrible, almost unspeakable crimes like assault against children, including sexual assault and murder," acting ICE Director Patrick Lechleitner said at a news conference. The nationwide enforcement effort took place between Jan. 16-28, 2024, Lechleitner said. 59 DEMOCRATS VOTE WITH REPUBLICANS PASSING BILL TO DEPORT ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS WHO COMMITTED DUIs Acting ICE Director Patrick Lechleitner speaks at a press conference in Washington, D.C., on Feb. 1, 2024. (Fox News) "The results of this week-long effort are a testament to ERO’s commitment to protecting the homeland through the arrest and removal of those who undermine the safety of U.S. communities and the integrity of U.S. immigration laws," the acting director said. "Enforcement and Removal Operations personnel are committed to enforcing the nation’s immigration laws humanely, effectively, and with the highest standards of professionalism." Those arrested include individuals wanted for or convicted of child molestation, child pornography, rape and murder. ILLEGAL MIGRANT FLIPS MIDDLE FINGERS AFTER BEING CHARGED WITH ATTACKING NYPD IN TIMES SQUARE A compilation of mugshots from the most egregious cases of illegal immigrants arrested by U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement. (U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement)A 53-year-old citizen of El Salvador was arrested in Tacoma, Washington, for instance, after convictions for felony child molestation in the first degree, child molestation in the second degree, and rape of a child in the third degree. Another 27-year-old citizen of El Salvador was taken into ICE custody in Los Angeles, having been convicted of lewd or lascivious acts with a child under 14 years old and possession of obscene matter of a minor in a sexual act. DEAD, NOT ON ARRIVAL: WHERE THE BIPARTISAN BORDER DEAL STANDS IN CONGRESS BEFORE ANYONE HAS EVEN SEEN IT VideoAt least two individuals had been previously deported before their arrest: A 45-year-old citizen of Mexico in Dallas convicted of sexual assault of a child, and a 32-year-old citizen of Mexico in Denver convicted of first-degree murder. In fiscal year 2023, ERO arrested 73,822 non-citizens with criminal histories, according to ICE data. Those arrested had 290,178 associated charges and convictions, averaging four per individual, officials said. The charges included 33,209 assaults; 4,390 sex and sexual assaults; 7,520 weapons offenses; 1,713 charges or convictions for homicide; and 1,655 kidnapping offenses, according to ICE. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APPRecord numbers of non-citizens are illegally present in the United States. U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) reported more than 3.2 million nationwide encounters for fiscal year 2023, an increase of 15% compared to the previous fiscal year. Chris Pandolfo is a writer for Fox News Digital. Send tips to chris.pandolfo@fox.com and follow him on Twitter @ChrisCPandolfo.
Brandon Judd slams Biden over border crisis: Everything he does is strictly based on politics National Border Patrol Council President Brandon Judd unpacks national security concerns with the southern border. Federal immigration authorities arrested an illegal immigrant wanted in Senegal for alleged terrorist activities, two weeks after he was released into the country after being encountered by agents at the southern border. In a press release, Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) says a 29-year-old "unlawfully present Mauritanian or Senegalese citizen" was arrested on Oct. 17. ICE says he is wanted by Senegalese authorities for criminal conspiracy in relation to a terrorist organization; destruction, degradation and damages in relation to a terrorist organization; direct provocation of an armed crowd and acts (or preparatory acts) aimed at compromising public safety. GRASSLEY SOUNDS ALARM ON POTENTIAL DRONE THREAT AT SOUTHERN BORDER AMID HAMAS TERROR CONCERNS June 2, 2022: ICE agents conduct an enforcement operation in the U.S. interior. ((Immigration and Customs Enforcement)) But he had first been encountered on Oct. 3 -- two weeks earlier -- by Border Patrol agents at the southern border near Lukeville, Arizona. He was then processed by officials and served with a Notice to Appear in New York City and released on his own recognizance. A week after he was released, on Oct. 10, ICE’s Homeland Security Investigations agents notified Enforcement and Removal Operations in New York City that he was wanted on terrorism charges in Senegal.ICE’s New York City Fugitive Operations team then arrested him "without incident" outside of the Federal Plaza immigration court in New York City. He is now in custody on deportation proceedings. "Noncitizens who are engaged in or suspected of supporting terrorism are a direct threat to our country’s national security and will be expeditiously removed from the United States," ERO New York City Field Office Director Kenneth Genalo said in a statement. "ERO New York City will use every tool at our disposal to keep American citizens and residents safe from those who erroneously believe they can exploit our immigration laws to escape justice in other countries."But the release of a foreign national who is wanted on terror charges in another country is likely to fuel ongoing concerns about terrorists or terror suspects getting into the U.S. at the besieged southern border -- particularly in the wake of the Hamas terror attack against Israel. Border Patrol agents have expressed concerns to Fox News before that, unless someone has committed a crime in the U.S., agents may not know a migrant's criminal history as many countries do not share their databases with the U.S. Republicans have separately raised concerns about the number of terror watch list encounters at the southern border, which hit a record in FY23, as well as the number of "special interest aliens" being encountered -- in addition to the hundreds of thousands of illegal immigrants who evaded agents as "gotaways." MAYORKAS CONFIRMS OVER 600,000 ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS EVADED LAW ENFORCEMENT AT SOUTHERN BORDER LAST FISCAL YEARRecently, a CBP memo warned agents about the possibility that foreign fighters associated with terror groups like Hamas may try and enter the U.S. -- although CBP has stressed that it has seen no indications of fighters trying to do so. VideoThe Department of Homeland Security’s fiscal 2024 threat assessment warned that agents have encountered a growing number on the watch list and warned that "terrorists and criminal actors may exploit the elevated flow and increasingly complex security environment to enter the United States." BORDER PATROL STOPS RECORD NUMBER OF PEOPLE ON TERROR WATCH LIST AT SOUTHERN BORDERDHS has stressed that it has "multilayered border security efforts" including screening and vetting, and has also said that encounters of known or suspected terrorists are uncommon. CLICK TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP "Our border security efforts include biometric and biographic screening and vetting," a DHS official said this week. "CBP screens and vets every individual encountered, and if an individual is determined to pose a potential threat to national security or public safety, in coordination with the Joint Terrorism Taskforce (JTTF), we either deny admission, detain, remove, or refer them to other federal agencies for further vetting and prosecution as appropriate." Adam Shaw is a politics reporter for Fox News Digital, primarily covering immigration and border security.He can be reached at adam.shaw2@fox.com or on Twitter.
Everyone in the world knows this border is wide open: Sen. Marco Rubio Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Fla., discusses how President Biden’s open borders are raising the alarm on potential terrorists entering the country on ‘Hannity.’ Pakistan's government has launched a massive crackdown on illegal immigrants mostly affecting Afghan nationals, some of whom have left their home country during the Taliban retaking of Afghanistan. The government cites terror concerns that echo the ongoing debate in the U.S. about the potential connection between illegal immigration and violence. Islamabad said the crackdown against illegal immigrants began Wednesday after a Nov. 1 deadline for them to leave the country. The crackdown primarily affects Afghans, who make up the majority of foreigners in the country. Authorities have cited crimes, including smuggling and militant attacks like suicide bombings, as justification for the deportation push. Reuters reported on government estimates that Afghan nationals were involved in 14 of this year’s 24 suicide bombings. The country’s government said all illegal immigrants should have left by Nov. 1 or face arrest and has begun deporting and detaining illegal immigrants. PAKISTAN SET TO DEPORT OVER 1.4 MILLION UNDOCUMENTED AFGHAN NATIONALS; UN SEEKS RELIEF ON DEADLINE Police officers detain immigrants who fail to provide legal documents during a search operation for illegal immigrants at a neighborhood of Karachi, Pakistan, Thursday, Nov. 2, 2023. (AP Photo/Fareed Khan) Amid the push, there are estimates that between 8,000 and 10,000 Afghans are leaving for Afghanistan each day, an increase from around 300 a day. Reuters reported that over 140,000 people had left voluntarily.Authorities have launched raids across the country to check for documents, including destroying mud-brick homes on the outskirts of the capital. Human Rights Watch has said many of those targeted for deportation are awaiting resettlement to other countries, including the United States. It has warned of threats and abuse being wielded by Pakistani officials against migrants. PAKISTAN ANNOUNCES BIG CRACKDOWN ON ITS ILLEGAL MIGRANTS, INCLUDING 1.7 MILLION AFGHANS The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) said in a press release it is "extremely alarmed" by Pakistan’s deportation announcement. There have been multiple movements of Afghans into Pakistan, including during the Soviet invasion in the 1970s and 1980s and amid the U.S. withdrawal in 2021, which also led to more than 70,000 Afghans being paroled into the U.S. Police officers leave after conducting a search operation for illegal immigrants in a neighborhood of Karachi, Pakistan, Thursday, Nov. 2, 2023. (AP Photo/Fareed Khan)The justification of terror concerns by Pakistan is similar in some ways to the concerns about terrorism expressed by Republicans and immigration hawks in the U.S. Lawmakers have expressed concerns about the besieged southern border, suggesting foreign nationals could be attempting to enter the U.S. via the border. They have pointed to hundreds of thousands of getaways at the border as well as a greater number of terror watch list encounters between ports of entry. Meanwhile, a Customs and Border Protection (CBP) memo warned that fighters tied to Hamas, Hezbollah and other groups could attempt to enter the U.S. The Department of Homeland Security’s fiscal 2024 threat assessment warned that agents have encountered a growing number on the watch list and warned that "terrorists and criminal actors may exploit the elevated flow and increasingly complex security environment to enter the United States." Illegal immigrants gather next to the U.S.-Mexico border fence in El Paso, Texas, Dec. 22, 2022. (John Moore/Getty Images) Some lawmakers have also expressed reservations about the vetting of Afghans paroled into the U.S. The Biden administration has since extended and redesignated Afghanistan for temporary protected status, which shields nationals already in the U.S. from deportation and allows them to apply for work permits due to conditions in their home country. White House spokesman John Kirby was asked at a White House press briefing Thursday about the Pakistani initiative to deport Afghans. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP "We'll let Pakistan speak to their policies with respect to refugees and asylum seekers," he said. "Obviously, we want to see all nations do what they can to help refugees and asylum seekers, and certainly (that) includes our Pakistani friends with respect to Afghans who are trying to flee."Other Democrats were more critical of the deportations "This is a direct violation of the basic right to asylum and a death sentence to the many Afghans who would be targeted by the Taliban. Pakistan must change course," Rep. Ilhan Omar, D-Minn., said on X, formerly Twitter.Fox News' Greg Wehner and The Associated Press contributed to this report. Adam Shaw is a politics reporter for Fox News Digital, primarily covering immigration and border security.He can be reached at adam.shaw2@fox.com or on Twitter.
Biden’s border crisis is a ‘bipartisan issue’: Chad Wolf Former Acting DHS Secretary Chad Wolf reacts to the record-breaking surge in migrant encounters as pressure mounts on the Biden administration to take action on the border crisis. EXCLUSIVE: The Biden administration has told lawmakers that an average of 5,000 illegal immigrants are currently being released into the U.S. each day at the border, while there were over 670,000 illegal immigrants who evaded Border Patrol last fiscal year, Fox News has learned. In a briefing on Friday to the Arizona congressional delegation, House and Senate Judiciary committees and the House and Senate Homeland Security committees, Fox is told that Department of Homeland Security officials told lawmakers that there were around 670,000 known "gotaways" at the border last fiscal year. DHS Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas had previously acknowledged that the number was over 600,000.Lawmakers have also been told there is an average of 5,000 illegal immigrants released each day to non-governmental organizations (NGOs), who provide migrants with assistance and will sometimes help them get to their destinations. If that pace holds throughout the entire year that would be over 1.8 million illegal entrants in that timeframe. MIGRANT ENCOUNTERS HIT DAILY RECORD AT SOUTHERN BORDER, AS WASHINGTON STRUGGLES TO AGREE ON SOLUTIONS Meanwhile, at the ports of entry, an average of 1,600 migrants are being processed and released via the use of humanitarian parole each day under the CBP One app. That authority is set by Congress to be used on a "case-by-case basis" for urgent humanitarian reasons or significant public benefit. Republicans have sought to limit the use of the authority, claiming the administration is abusing it — something officials have denied repeatedly. Border Patrol agents have encountered migrants from over 150 countries, lawmakers were told. Dec. 5, 2023: Migrants are seen camped out near Lukeville, Arizona. (Fox News)The daily record for encounters was broken this week when over 12,000 migrants hit the border in a single day. That comes after a record-setting 2.4 million encounters in FY23 and an all-time monthly high of over 260,000 in September. Officials said that there have been over 440,000 encounters since Oct. 1, when the new fiscal year began. The Tucson Sector, which has been at the center of the most recent migrant surge that has seen hundreds of mostly male adult migrants queued up against the border fence, agents are outmanned 200 to 1 in the field, officials said.The Biden administration has been calling for additional border funding from Congress with a $14 billion request, which includes funding for migrant care, costs related to expedited removal and help for cities. But that has been blocked so far as Republicans seek limits on releases into the U.S. by increasing asylum screening standards and reducing parole use — proposals at which some Democrats have balked. ‘I LOVE YOU JOE BIDEN:’ MIGRANT THANKS POTUS AFTER CROSSING ILLEGALLY IN ARIZONA Dec. 5, 2023: Migrants flee through a gap being repaired in the border wall in Lukeville, Arizona. (Fox News) The administration has said overall that it is dealing with a hemisphere-wide crisis and needs funding and immigration reform to fix what it says is a broken system. The administration has touted a significant expansion of "lawful migration pathways" while also claiming it has increased consequences for illegal entry in the wake of the end of Title 42 in May.At the briefing, officials were asked what the U.S. government is doing to work with Mexico to stop masses of migrants riding on trains to the border. An official said they have stressed to authorities that the "safety and security" of noncitizens" is a major concern given they are riding the trains illegally in an "unsafe" manner, but offered no details on trying to stop migrants getting on trains in the first place. VideoPresident Biden this week attempted to break the gridlock on solutions to the border by saying he was open to "significant compromises," although DHS Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas defended the administration’s handling of the crisis and suggested that some GOP proposals were off the table. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP"We've presented proposals that address the situation, that provide real practical solutions and also do not do violence to our fundamental values," he said on CNN. "We are a country of refugees. We do have asylum laws. We do have refugee laws. We abide by our international obligations that are long-standing," he said. "And so that is my response to that." "Some of the [Republican] proposals are reasonable and worthy of discussion. Others are, frankly, not," he said. Adam Shaw is a politics reporter for Fox News Digital, primarily covering immigration and border security.He can be reached at adam.shaw2@fox.com or on Twitter.
Border cities want solutions, enough with the ‘finger pointing’: Rep. Tony Gonzales Rep. Henry Cuellar, D-Texas, and Rep. Tony Gonzales, R-Texas, joined ‘Fox News Sunday’ to discuss the U.S. border crisis as the number of migrant encounters reached a record high in December. Border Agents in the Tucson, Arizona, sector are seeing an influx of immigrants from Guinea using fake passports to claim they are minors when entering the United States illegally, according to an internal alert obtained by Fox News. The illegal immigrants are changing their ages and pretending to be unaccompanied minors so they’ll have a better chance of getting into the U.S.The Border Patrol notice advises agents on what to look out for, and provides examples of real and fake Guinean passports. It warns that passports issued in the municipality of Conakry, Guinea’s capital, after June 2023 are "most likely fraudulent or altered." ERIC ADAMS SAYS NYC IS AT ‘BREAKING POINT’ AS HE WARNS OF ANOTHER SURGE OF MIGRANTS FROM TEXAS An internal Border Patrol notice obtained by Fox News. It warns agents to be on the lookout for fake passports some illegal immigrants are using to pose as minors to enter the U.S. (US Border Patrol) The notice also alerts agents that the Guinean government might be playing a direct role in the fraud. Custodial interviews with Guinean migrants with suspected phony passports indicate that Guinean government officials "may be advising people obtaining new passports they can change their age for them to have a better chance of entering the United States as minors." The West African country of Guinea as seen on a map. (Getty Images) Most encounters, Border Patrol notes, are from adults claiming to be unaccompanied children. CHICAGO MAYOR ON MIGRANT CRISIS: ‘ENTIRE COUNTRY IS NOW AT STAKE’ WITHOUT SIGNIFICANT ASSISTANCE FROM BIDEN Another migrant, according to Border Patrol, noted that an "illicit group" stole many blank passport books from the ministry in Conakry and "has been selling and issuing the passports without the proper procedures." A U.S. Border Patrol agent checks for identification of immigrants as they wait to be processed after crossing the border from Mexico on Dec. 30, 2022, in Yuma, Arizona. (Qian Weizhong/VCG via Getty Images)CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The alert comes as hundreds of adult men from Guinea have been crossing into the Tucson sector. Border Patrol sources estimate that nearly 170 Guinean nationals crossed in the Tucson sector on Saturday alone. Bradford Betz is a Fox News Digital breaking reporter covering crime, political issues, and much more.
Fox News Flash top headlines for March 30 Fox News Flash top headlines are here. Check out what's clicking on Foxnews.com. Chinese nationals are crossing the U.S.-Mexico border into the U.S. in unprecedented numbers this year, with the first few months of FY 2023 already eclipsing the total for 2022. The U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) reports that just under 2,000 Chinese nationals crossed the border in FY 2022, but the first few months of FY 2023 have already seen 4,300 encounters, according to federal data.The wave of Chinese migrants comes as the country bristles against Chinese President Xi Jinping's continued crackdown on freedoms. China saw a large wave of protests in recent months following Xi's widespread COVID-19 lockdowns. "So the word is out, right?," Rep. Vicente Gonzalez, D-Texas, told Axios. "If you can get to our southern border, you have a pretty good shot at getting in, and it has changed the demographics." ILLEGAL IMMIGRATION NOW COSTS US TAXPAYERS $151 BILLION A YEAR, NEW STUDY FINDS Border Patrol agents watch migrants at the U.S.-Mexico border in Arizona as they await processing. (Qian Weizhong/VCG via Getty Images) Chinese President Xi Jinping's strict polices have caused more and more Chinese citizens to flee the country, activists say. (Lintao Zhang/Getty Images) Republicans have accused President Biden of refusing to enforce U.S. border policies, which they argue sends the message to other migrants that the U.S. border is open.Biden has faced record-breaking numbers of border crossings since gaining office in 2021. His first month in office saw 100,000 migrant encounters, according to CBP data. Now, however, the CBP tracks some 230,000 migrant encounters each month. PROGRESSIVES IN UPROAR AFTER WHITE HOUSE CONSIDERS DETAINING MIGRANT FAMILIESA federal judge in Florida struck down the Biden administration’s use of parole to mass release migrants into the U.S. earlier this month, finding the practice unlawful and accusing the administration of turning the border into a "meaningless line in the sand." Judge T. Kent Wetherell ruled in response to a lawsuit from the state of Florida, arguing the Biden administration had "effectively turned the Southwest Border into a meaningless line in the sand and little more than a speedbump for aliens flooding into the country." President Biden's administration has overseen an unprecedented spike in illegal immigration at the U.S.-Mexico border. (Joe Raedle/Getty Images) CLICK TO GET THE FOX NEWS APPThe Biden administration saw 1.7 million migrant encounters in 2021, followed by 2.3 million encounters in 2022. More are expected in 2023.Fox News' Adam Shaw contributed to this report. Anders Hagstrom is a reporter with Fox News Digital covering national politics and major breaking news events. Send tips to Anders.Hagstrom@Fox.com, or on Twitter: @Hagstrom_Anders.
Senator on illegal immigration crisis: Democrats are destroying this country Sen. Ron Johnson, R-Wis., talks about the ongoing rise of illegal immigration, the Senate working on border legislation, and the GOP holding the FBI accountable over an anti-Catholic memo. Elon Musk took to X to call out an advantage that blue states have over red states in elections as a result of illegal immigration. "Most people in America don’t know that the census is based on a simple headcount of people (including illegals) not just citizens," Musk wrote Saturday. "This shifts political power and money to states and Congressional districts with the highest number of illegals."The post comes after comments made by Rep. Yvette Clarke, D-N.Y. during a 2021 House Foreign Affairs hearing seemingly made light of the issue, with Clarke arguing she needed "more people in my district just for redistricting purposes." Clarke's comment, which came during a discussion about U.S. policy toward Haitian migrants, have been cited by critics who want end the counting of illegal migrants for congressional apportionment. MIGRANT CRISIS BROKE NEW RECORD IN DECEMBER WITH 302K ENCOUNTERS Elon Musk (Justin Sullivan) The issue has also drawn attention from Republican members of Congress, with some going so far as to introduce an amendment to the Constitution that would require congressional district be apportioned by the population of citizens alone, not counting illegal migrants.One such Republican was Rep. Thomas Massie, R-Ky., who responded to Musk's post and touted the resolution he cosponsored. "True. And when they find out, most Americans disagree with the current practice of counting illegals in the census and awarding congressional representation and electoral votes based on illegals," Massie said in response to Musk.Massie's office did not immediately respond to a Fox News Digital request for comment. The issue was also picked up by Senate Republicans later last month, including Sen. Kevin Cramer, R-N.D., who cosponsored legislation called the Equal Representation Act, which he said would "address the inclusion of illegal immigrants in the count for congressional district apportionment and Electoral College votes; highlight the potential for disproportionate political power." Rep. Thomas Massie (Anna Rose Layden/Getty Images) BIDEN CLAIMS ‘I’VE DONE ALL I CAN DO' TO SECURE THE BORDERIn a press release announcing the legislation, Cramer pointed to the surge in illegal immigration under the Biden administration, citing Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) data that found that the amount of non-detained docket immigration climbed by 30.3% in fiscal 2023 compared to the previous year."The Biden administration’s refusal to secure the southern border and then just allow unfettered entry into the United States by illegal immigrants has far-reaching impacts, far beyond just the things we think of on the surface," Cramer said in the release. "The Census is the foundation for representation in our political system, and any census that could include non-citizens in the apportionment count is really concerning to me, and it ought to be to all North Dakotans. Illegal immigrants and non-citizens cannot vote and should not be used as pawns as the Democrats redistrict in various states. Our Census has to count both Americans and non-Americans but should also distinguish between them." Sen. Kevin Cramer, R-N.D. (Drew Angerer/Getty Images) The White House did not immediately respond to a Fox News Digital request for comment.The legislation was also backed by Sens. Bill Hagerty, R-Tenn., Marsha Blackburn, R-Tenn., Mike Braun, R-Ind., Katie Britt, R-Ala., Ted Budd, R-N.C., Bill Cassidy, R-La., Mike Crapo, R-Idaho, Steve Daines, R-Mont., Cindy Hyde-Smith, R-Miss., James Lankford, R-Okla., Mike Lee, R-Utah, Cynthia Lummis, R-Wyo., Roger Marshall, R-Kan., Pete Ricketts, R-Neb., Jim Risch, R-Idaho, Mike Rounds, R-S.D., Eric Schmitt, R-Mo., John Thune, R-S.D., Tommy Tuberville, R-Ala., and JD Vance, R-Ohio.CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Hagerty, who led the effort, said in a press release that it is "unconscionable that illegal immigrants and non-citizens are counted toward congressional district apportionment and our electoral map." "While people continue to flee Democrat-run cities, desperate Democrats are back-filling the mass exodus with illegal immigrants so that they do not lose their seats in Congress or their electoral votes for the presidency, hence artificially boosting their political power and in turn diluting the power of other Americans’ votes," Hagerty said.
Over 2,000 migrants illegally cross Texas border overnight Video shows a rush of over 2,200 migrants crossing the southern border overnight in Eagle Pass, Texas. An illegal immigrant from Peru – who was released into the U.S. only a few months ago before being charged with murder this week – is accused of killing a U.S. citizen, the Maverick County Sheriff confirmed to Fox News on Wednesday. The sheriff confirmed that the victim is a 40-year-old male from Houston, and said that there was a "struggle" and the victim was found dead at a house in Eagle Pass, Texas with blunt force injuries to the head.Fox News reported Tuesday that 64-year-old Roberto Emilio Vasquez-Santamaria was charged with murder after being arrested in connection to the homicide that took place Monday. ILLEGAL IMMIGRANT FROM PERU CHARGED WITH MURDER IN TEXAS, ENTERED MONTHS AGO Multiple Customs and Border Protection (CBP) sources told Fox that the Peruvian national crossed illegally into Eagle Pass - a key crossing area for illegal immigrants seeking entry into the United States -- in May. He was processed by Border Patrol for release with a Notice to Appear (NTA) in court for immigration removal proceedings. That court date was not until 2025. Sources stressed to Fox that Border Patrol itself does not determine the release policy of illegal immigrants into the interior, and agents are carrying out policies set by the Biden administration.Immigration and Customs Enforcement confirmed that he was enrolled into Alternatives to Detention on May 8 with instructions to report to ICE's office in Miami by July 3. He reported in with the field office on May 15, at which point he was taken out of the ATD program. ICE says the program "allows ICE to exercise increased supervision over a subset of those on ICE’s docket, using several different monitoring technologies" and helps increase court appearance rates. "As with any noncitizen in the United States without lawful status, ICE officers make enforcement decisions on a case-by-case basis to focus on the greatest threats to homeland security in a professional and responsible manner informed by their experience as law enforcement officers," a spokesperson said. Roberto Emilio Vasquez-Santamaria (Maverick County Sheriffs Office)May, when Vasquez-Santamaria entered the U.S., saw a sharp increase in illegal immigration across the border before the ending of the Title 42 public health order on May 11, with agents being overwhelmed by around 10,000 encounters a day at one point. Numbers dropped sharply after the order ended and remained relatively low in June, but have increased again in July and August. Sources have told Fox News that there were around 230,000 migrant encounters in August, up from over 180,000 in July and 144,000 in June. DHS REFUSES TO RELEASE DATA ON ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS' CARTEL TIES, CITING PRIVACY CONCERNS VideoThose numbers have shown no sign of slowing down in September. Officials have made over 45,000 migrant encounters in the last five days alone, sources told Fox on Wednesday, with multiple days of over 8,000 illegal immigrant encounters.CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Fox has previously reported how sectors are overwhelmed, and leadership had told sectors to speed up processing to deal with overcrowding. Multiple sectors, including Tucson and San Diego, have seen mass street releases of busloads of migrants in recent days as agents struggle to cope with the numbers they are seeing.Fox News' Sarah Rumpf-Whitten contributed to this report. Adam Shaw is a politics reporter for Fox News Digital, primarily covering immigration and border security.He can be reached at adam.shaw2@fox.com or on Twitter.
Majority of illegal immigrants in US receiving taxpayer-funded government benefits Central American migrants are arriving by the thousands without a penny to their name. How do they get by? William La Jeunesse breaks down the cost. This week, the U.S. Supreme Court considers whether to count self-identified illegal immigrants in the 2020 census. Cities worry adding the citizenship question could undercount 6.5 million people. Their argument, however, isn't just about political power but billions of dollars in federal funds states expect. The case underscores what experts say is a growing cost to taxpayers from the surge of Central American families and unaccompanied minors."We're talking about billions of dollars in taxpayer benefits over the next few years," said Dan Stein, director of the right-leaning think tank, Federation for American Immigration Reform. "The payout for the taxpayer is enormous and income to the Treasury is miniscule." A FAIR study in 2017 found illegal immigrants are a net consumer of taxpayer benefits worth more than $100 billion a year, not including the cost of enforcing the border. While federal benefits are supposed to be off limits, in practice many are not. More than 25,000 undocumented workers receive subsidized housing, according to the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. Children receive free education and most qualify for English lessons and free school breakfast and lunch. NEW MEXICO COUNTY DECLARES STATE OF EMERGENCY OVER SURGE OF ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS CROSSING THE BORDERIllegal immigrants do not qualify for Obamacare but under federal law, hospitals and clinics are required to provide urgent medical care without regard to legal status. Pregnant women are entitled to prenatal and postpartum care under the Women, Infants and Children program. Infant delivery costs are paid for by Medicaid. A study in the Journal of the American Medical Association found a federal-state immigrant insurance program cost $2 billion a year in emergency treatment, not including the $1.24 billion in infant delivery expenses. Illegal immigrants are not entitled to food stamps, but families with U.S.-born children are. According to the Center for Immigration Studies, 31% of such families use the SNAP program and more than 50% of Central American families in the U.S. use at least one welfare program.This is especially true of asylum seekers said Art Arthur, a former immigration judge now with the Center for Immigration Studies, an immigration think tank. Arthur said because there is a three to five year lag time between apprehension and court appearance, young asylum seekers put down roots, allowing many to access programs they are initially unaware or afraid to use. "You're going to buy a house, get a job, have kids," he said. "So their entire life changes, and that means their claim changes. Because of a lack of a bright line for immigration judges, appeals are endless and people don't leave." Recognizing that many illegal workers fill jobs communities need, 26 states offer them *state-funded* benefits. New York state offers up to $300 a month in cash assistance. Eleven states offer free or subsidized medical and hospital care. California offers food stamps, legal services and benefits for those over 65 or disabled. Gov. Gavin Newsom recently asked for an extra $50 million from lawmakers to serve the state's illegal immigrant population.VICE PRESIDENT MIKE PENCE: CONGRESS MUST ACT TO END THE CRISIS ON OUR BORDERSuch sanctuary states and immigrant-friendly cities are an obvious draw, but others say it is all about finding work not using benefits. The Current Population Survey conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau in 2018 found Central American families may struggle financially in the U.S. but they work (76%) at high rates than native-born Americans (73%)."At the end of the day people are going to go where their jobs are, not necessarily where the services are," said Ali Noorani, director of the National Immigration Forum. "So yes, 26 states may provide state-funded access to public benefits. But if those states don't have a growing economy and don't have jobs that are open immigrants, much as anybody else, they're not going to see them."Up to 70% of immigrants apprehended at the border this fiscal year are families or unaccompanied minors claiming asylum. Unlike other border crossers, after six months asylum seekers qualify for work permits and most taxpayer subsidies. But because most are unskilled and uneducated, they earn minimum wage or less. Almost half, according to the census survey, never finished high school. They earn 40% less than U.S.-born workers and about 50% of families live in poverty, requiring community support for food and cash for necessities. Some have sponsors, but most are usually immediate families that are not much better off. "There is a cost for communities for sure," Sen. Martha McSally, R-Ariz., said last week outside a Salvation Army shelter in Yuma. "Whether it is in uncompensated care in hospitals or the education system in different ways. It has never really been measured, but it is very real."CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Advocates for illegal immigrants argue most studies are flawed because they do not account for their economic contribution to the economy as a whole. Not just because they perform jobs Americans won't, but studies don't account for their lower wage differential that produces cost savings to U.S. consumers."We need an immigration system that treats the American taxpayer fairly," Noorani said. "Right now, our immigration system doesn't treat the American taxpayer fairly and I would argue it really treats nobody fairly. At the federal level, what the Congress and the president need to do is work together to create an immigration system that is fair to the taxpayer and 10 or 11 million people who are undocumented." U.S. officials expect a million additional illegal immigrants this fiscal year, as the Border Patrol is currently apprehending up to 4,000 a day. Most will claim asylum, entitling them to government benefits.
Sen. JD Vance: We need to stop supporting Ukrains war efforts Sen. JD Vance, R-Ohio, slams President Bidens depletion of ammunition stockpiles, saying the U.S. should roll back its support until ‘we have enough bullets for our own troops.’ FIRST ON FOX: Sen. JD Vance, R-Ohio is introducing legislation Thursday that would require immigrants with temporary visas to pay thousands of dollars before entering the U.S. – as part of the effort to crack down on visa overstays The Timely Departure Act would require some foreign nationals seeking admission to the U.S. on a temporary visa to pay between $5,000 and $15,000 in a bond or cash payment. That money would then be returned to them when they leave the U.S. in accordance with the terms of the visa, or transfer to a green card.If they overstayed, however, that money would be retained by the Department of Homeland Security, and it would be diverted into an account – the ‘Immigration Detention and Enforcement Account" – to fund the detention and removal of those in the country illegally. The bill would also bar visa overstays from making a defensive asylum claim after their visas have expired. REPUBLICANS FUME AT MAYORKAS OVER BORDER POLICIES AT FIERY HOUSE HEARING UNITED STATES - MARCH 7: Sen. J.D. Vance, R-Ohio, attends the Senate Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs Committee hearing titled The Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress, in Hart Building on Tuesday, March 7, 2023. Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell testified. (Tom Williams/CQ-Roll Call, Inc via Getty Images) (Tom Williams) The U.S. has struggled to tackle the issue of visa overstays – in which immigrants arrive legally into the U.S. on a visa limited by time or on condition of employment, but then remain in the U.S. even when the time expires or they are no longer employed.Vance’s office noted data that there are approximately 700,000 visa overstays a year, making it an often-overlooked but significant contribution to the illegal immigration problem the U.S. is tackling. In FY 2020, there were 684,499 overstays – about 1.48% of expected departures. HOUSE HOMELAND GOP REPORT ACCUSES MAYORKAS OF ‘INTENTIONAL’ DERELICTION OF DUTY OVER BORDER CRISIS"America is a welcoming nation, but we are also a nation of laws," Vance said in a statement. "There are millions of people in this country who have abused our visa system and circumvented our legal immigration process. It is a slap in the face to the working-class Ohioans whose wages are suffering – I will not stand for it." "I'm proud to introduce this legislation and bring some sanity to our broken immigration system," he said.The Timely Departure Act by Fox News on Scribd The bond system would not apply to certain temporary visas, including diplomatic visas, visas for human trafficking victims and visas for those transiting through the country. It would apply to tourist and business visas, but not to those nationals who are enrolled in the Visa Waiver Program – which allows nationals of some countries to come to the U.S. for 90 days for pleasure or business.The legislation highlights how the debate over immigration and tackling illegal immigration can extend beyond security at the southern border.MIGRANT NUMBERS DROP SHARPLY IN JUNE AS BIDEN ADMIN'S POST-TITLE 42 STRATEGY TAKES SHAPE Video While the U.S. has been engaged in a border crisis now into its third year, lawmakers have been debating potential fixes to the immigration system for years, but are often unable to find agreement on broad overhauls. It has led lawmakers to attempt to provide smaller fixes to specific immigration issues. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APPThe Biden administration has called for Congress to pass sweeping legislation that it introduced on day one of the administration, to fix what DHS Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas has declared a "broken" immigration system. However, it has been rejected by Republicans due to the inclusion of a mass amnesty for millions of illegal immigrants already in the U.S. Adam Shaw is a politics reporter for Fox News Digital, primarily covering immigration and border security.He can be reached at adam.shaw2@fox.com or on Twitter.
Shooting at New Mexico conquistador statue protest A suspect was arrested after allegedly shooting and wounding a man at a protest in Española, New Mexico, where officials had planned to install a statue of Spanish conquistador Juan de Oñate, authorities said. A new class-action lawsuit alleges that U.S. immigration authorities disregarded signs of unsanitary and unsafe conditions at a detention center in New Mexico to ensure the facility would continue to receive public funding and remain open. The lawsuit announced Wednesday by a coalition of migrants' rights advocates was filed on behalf of four Venezuelans ranging in age from 26 to 40 who have sought asylum in the U.S. and say they were denied medical care, access to working showers and adequate food at the Torrance County Detention Facility, all while being pressed into cleaning duties, sometimes without compensation.The detention center in the rural town of Estancia, about 200 miles from the Mexico border, is contracted by Immigration and Customs Enforcement to accommodate at least 505 adult male migrants at any time, though actual populations fluctuate. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY'S INSPECTOR GENERAL STANDS BY CALL TO RELOCATE ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS FROM NEW MEXICO ICE FACILITY HIT FOR 'EGREGIOUS' CONDITIONS The Torrance County Detention Facility is seen in Estancia, New Mexico. A lawsuit on behalf of four migrants accuses U.S. immigration authorities of disregarded indications of unsanitary and unsafe conditions at the immigrant detention center to ensure the facility would remain open, in violation of federal standards. (AP Photo/Andres Leighton, File) ICE ACCUSES DHS INSPECTOR GENERAL OF STAGING PHOTOGRAPH IN CRITICAL REPORT ON MIGRANT FACILITY Advocates have repeatedly alleged in recent years that the facility has inadequate living conditions and there is limited access to legal counsel for asylum-seekers who cycle through. They have urged ICE to end its contract with a private detention operator, while calling on state lawmakers to ban local government contracts for migrant detention."The point is that ICE can’t turn a blind eye to conditions in detention facilities," said Mark Feldman, senior attorney at the National Immigrant Justice Center, which is among those representing the plaintiffs. "They maintain congressionally mandated oversight responsibility over conditions wherever immigrants are detained." The detention center failed a performance evaluation in 2021, and the lawsuit alleges that ICE scrambled to avoid documentation of a second consecutive failure that might discontinue federal funding by endorsing a "deeply flawed, lax inspection" by an independent contractor.The lawsuit says the agency disregarded contradictory findings by the Department of Homeland Security Inspector General and a contracting officer at ICE that suggested continued unhealthy conditions and staff shortages. A spokesperson for U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement said Thursday that the agency does not comment on litigation. Last year Chief of Staff Jason Houser said ICE would continuously monitor the facility and noted that it stopped using the Etowah County Detention Center in Alabama when expectations there were not met. CoreCivic, the private operator at Torrance County, said ICE has repeatedly audited the Estancia facility with results that support continued operations.MIGRANT CHILDREN SUFFERED PANIC ATTACKS, ‘DESPAIR’ AT FORT BLISS FACILITY UNDER BIDEN: WATCHDOG"We provide a safe, humane and appropriate environment for those entrusted to us and are constantly striving to deliver an even better standard of care," spokesperson Ryan Gustin said via email. As of September about 35,000 migrants were being held in ICE detention facilities across the U.S., while the agency monitors another 195,000 under alternatives to detention as they advance through immigration or removal proceedings, according to Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse at Syracuse University.The southern border region has struggled to cope with increasing numbers of migrants from South America who move quickly through the Darien Gap between Colombia and Panama before heading north.The plaintiffs in the lawsuit, which was filed in U.S. District Court in Albuquerque, are also represented by the ACLU, Innovation Law Lab and attorneys for Quinn Emanuel Urquhart & Sullivan.
Biden's border crisis: CBP reports record number of migrant encounters this year 'Special Report' All-Star panelists discuss the growing border surge at the U.S.-Mexico border. Texas authorities have arrested nearly 10,000 migrants who illegally crossed the U.S.-Mexico border under a new "arrest and jail" operation aimed at deterring illegal immigration. Following the successful arrests, Texas passed a new law that will bolster the smaller-scale operation to expand the authority to make arrests, as well as give local judges the authority to order the migrants out of the country. The changes go into effect in March.The new law comes after Texas first launched the smaller-scale operation to arrest migrants on misdemeanor trespassing charges in July 2021 as Texas-Mexico border crossings reached 1.2 million that fiscal year. The initiative allows border landowners to enter agreements with the state authorizing trespassing arrests, clearing the way for law enforcement to apprehend migrants who enter the U.S. through those properties. TEXAS GOV. ABBOTT SIGNS BILL MAKING ILLEGAL IMMIGRATION A STATE CRIME Migrants take part in a caravan toward the border with the United States in Tapachula, Chiapas State, Mexico, on Dec. 24. (STR/AFP via Getty Images) Republican Gov. Greg Abbott had predicted the trespassing arrests would produce swift results."When people start learning about this, they’re going to stop coming across the Texas border," Abbott told Fox News in July 2021. Video Border crossings topped 1.5 million over the past fiscal year."They’re still coming through here," Maverick County Sheriff Tom Schmerber said. MIGRANT CRISIS INCREASING STRAIN ON BORDER OFFICIALS, IMMIGRATION COURTS WITH MASSIVE NUMBERS People camp as they wait to cross the border between Mexico and the United States in Ciudad Juarez, Mexico on December 27, 2023. (Christian Torres/Anadolu via Getty Images) The trespassing arrests are spearheaded by the Texas Department of Public Safety, which said the state's border operation has resulted in more than 37,000 total criminal arrests.Spokesperson Ericka Miller said those arrested included gang members, human traffickers, sex offenders and others.NOVEMBER SAW NEARLY QUARTER OF A MILLION MIGRANT ENCOUNTERS AMID NEW BORDER SURGE "Had we not been there, all of it likely would have crossed into the country unimpeded," Miller told The Associated Press. "The state of Texas is working to send a message to those considering crossing into the country illegally to think again." Immigrants walk along the fortified bank of the Rio Grande after crossing the border from Mexico into the United States as Border Patrol agents look on in Eagle Pass, Texas. (John Moore/Getty Images)The trespassing arrests have been a cornerstone of Abbott’s nearly $10 billion border mission known as Operation Lone Star that has tested the federal government’s authority over immigration.CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP In addition, Abbott has sent an estimated 80,000 migrants on buses to Democrat-led cities, including New York, Chicago, and Washington, D.C. Mexican President Andrés Manuel López Obrador said on Friday that his government was aware of a new migrant caravan and said it would step up efforts to contain immigration. Migrants who crossed the border through the Rio Bravo from Mexico into the U.S. wait next to the U.S. border wall where Border Patrol agents stand guard in Ciudad Juárez, Mexico. (Getty Images)The arrests have drawn legal challenges, including claims of due process violations. Civil rights organizations have also sued to stop the new law signed by Abbott from taking effect, calling it an unconstitutional overreach that encroaches on the U.S. government's immigration authority. The Associated Press contributed to this report.
Illegal immigrants escape into the U.S. through gap in Arizona border wall Fox News video shows illegal immigrants entering the U.S. via a gap in a border wall in Arizona. (Fox News/Bryan Allman) Join Fox News for access to this content Plus get unlimited access to thousands of articles, videos and more with your free account! Please enter a valid email address. By entering your email, you are agreeing to Fox News Terms of Service and Privacy Policy, which includes our Notice of Financial Incentive. To access the content, check your email and follow the instructions provided. Illegal immigrants streamed through a smuggler-made gap in the border wall in Lukeville, Arizona, on Thursday evening, highlighting the continued challenges faced by Border Patrol agents, even in areas where there has been wall construction. Fox News shot the video in Lukeville, Arizona, which showed illegal immigrants streaming through the breach, which had been cut by the cartels. People who are believed to be smugglers appear in the gap, clapping at the illegal immigrants to hurry up before they return to Mexico.In another part of the video, smugglers can be seen recording the migrants with their phones, likely recording proof that their human cargo has been delivered into the U.S. JOHNSON CALLS MIGRANT CRISIS ‘TRULY UNCONSCIONABLE’ DURING VISIT TO BESIEGED SOUTHERN BORDER January 4, 2024: Migrants flee through a gap in the border wall in Lukeville, Arizona. (Fox News/Bryan Allman) The video shows the coordination of smugglers to get illegal immigrants into the U.S., at which point they will either flee deeper into the U.S. or turn themselves in to Border Patrol, after which they are often released into the care of non-governmental organizations. There were over 300,000 migrant encounters alone in December, including those who crossed illegally and those who appeared at ports of entry, in addition to the more than 2.4 million encounters in FY 23. Meanwhile, Fox has reported that during a period of December there were over 5,000 migrants releases each day. The number of illegal immigrants on Immigration and Customs Enforcement’s non-detained docket soared from 3.7 million in FY 2021 to nearly 4.8 million in FY 2022 to nearly 6.2 million in FY 2023. The non-detained docket includes illegal immigrants who have final orders of removal or are going through removal proceedings but are not detained in ICE custody. The crisis has put increasing political pressure on the Biden administration. Republicans, as well as Democratic mayors who have seen massive migrant surges into their cities, have called on the administration to do more to solve the crisis.Republicans have called on the Biden administration to limit the release of migrants into the U.S. interior, including by the use of humanitarian parole. Republicans in the House have also pushed legislation that would restore Trump-era programs and also restrict asylum claims. BIDEN ADMIN EYES MORE DEPORTATION FLIGHTS TO VENEZUELA AS MIGRANT NUMBERS SHATTER RECORDS Video The Biden administration has said it is facing a Hemisphere-wide crisis and is pursuing a policy of targeting smugglers, expanding "lawful pathways" and increasing consequences for illegal entry, arguing that it has removed over 460,000 people since May.CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APPBut it says it is working within a broken system and needs funding and immigration reform from Congress. It has requested an additional $14 billion, but that request is being held up as Republicans demand more limits on asylum — something that many Democrats have rejected. Seperately, the Biden administration announced a lawsuit this week against the state of Texas after Governor Greg Abbott signed legislation that would allow for state and local police to arrest illegal immigrants.Fox News' Aubrie Spady contributed to this report. Adam Shaw is a politics reporter for Fox News Digital, primarily covering immigration and border security.He can be reached at adam.shaw2@fox.com or on Twitter.
Growing concerns of another 9/11 from Bidens open border policies The Outnumbered panel discussed Bidens border policies amid growing fears that terrorists could be in the country. FIRST ON FOX: The attorneys general of more than two dozen states are urging new House Speaker Mike Johnson to prioritize legislation that would open the door to state officials acting as federal immigration officers – as one way to tackle the ongoing migrant crisis. "We, Attorneys General for 26 States, write to congratulate you on being elected Speaker of the House and to urge you to use your new position to prioritize enactment of the Immigration Enforcement Partnership Act of 2023, H.R. 1337, or similar legislation giving States more authority to combat illegal immigration," the letter, led by Florida AG Ashley Moody, says.H.R. 1337 was introduced last year in the House by Rep. Bill Posey, R-Fla. It says that if a state AG finds that the head of the Department of Homeland Security is "not adequately fulfilling his non-discretionary duties" in enforcing U.S. immigration law – particularly on the arrest, detention and deportation of illegal immigrants – state officials may request in writing that DHS do so. REP. POSEY, FLORIDA AG MOODY UNVEIL BILL TO ALLOW STATES TO DEMAND ENFORCEMENT OF FEDERAL IMMIGRATION LAW Representative Mike Johnson, a Republican from Louisiana, speaks after becoming US House speaker in the House Chamber at the U.S. Capitol in Washington, D.C. on Wednesday, Oct. 25, 2023. (Ting Shen/Bloomberg via Getty Images) The secretary can then either follow the request or authorize state officials to act as immigration officers on behalf of the federal government in apprehending, arresting and deporting illegal immigrants. If the secretary does not comply within 30 days, the attorney general can file a civil action in a U.S. district court to enforce those requirements. However, state officials say it has yet to receive a hearing in the House, and are hoping that may change under a new speaker. The letter notes record numbers of migrant encounters -- including terror watchlist encounters -- by Customs and Border Protection (CBP) at the southern border in FY 23. "Had Congress acted sooner, the U.S. might not be setting yet another record for CBP encounters at the border. We will never know, but if we take action now to give states the authority to do the job [President] Biden and [DHS Secretary Alejandro] Mayorkas refuse to do, we could prevent another record next year." WHITE HOUSE, SENATE DEMS REJECT GOP BORDER SECURITY PROPOSALS: ‘TOTAL NON-STARTER’Attorneys General to Speaker Johnson on HR1337 by Fox News on Scribd "It is surprising to us that H.R. 1337 and other similar proposed laws have received so little attention, and we hope that under your leadership that will change," they say, requesting a hearing "on an expedited basis." The state officials also cite the increased amount of fentanyl seized at the southern border, including a 110lb seizure in Rio Grande Valley in September, as well as the Hamas terrorist attack against Israel as a sign of a possible terror threat at the U.S. border. Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis listens as Florida Attorney General Ashley Moody speaks during a press conference at the Broward County Courthouse on August 18, 2022 in Fort Lauderdale, Florida. ((Photo by Joe Raedle/Getty Images)) The AGs note a number of court cases they have launched against the administration but say that "the judicial system alone is not a sufficient battlefield to quickly and adequately address" the crisis.In a separate statement, Moody noted her lawsuit to stop the mass release of migrants without court dates into the interior, while also re-expressing her concerns about the flow of fentanyl into the U.S. and the potential threat posed by terrorists."Congress must pass the Immigration Enforcement Partnership Act and allow states to do the job Biden refuses to do – as the terror threat continues to grow – secure the border and protect Americans," she said. CLICK TO GET THE FOX NEWS APPHouse Republicans, meanwhile, have passed sweeping legislation to increase border security and limit asylum and parole releases into the interior, but it has yet to be considered by the Senate. Senate Republicans last week introduced their own border proposals as part of discussions surrounding the White House’s supplemental budget request -- but they were quickly rejected by Senate Democrats.The White House is requesting from Congress $14 billion for its ongoing border operations, including money for migrant services and housing, anti-fentanyl technology and more border agents. Adam Shaw is a politics reporter for Fox News Digital, primarily covering immigration and border security.He can be reached at adam.shaw2@fox.com or on Twitter.
Senators have a ‘long way to go’ over an immigration deal: Chad Pergram Fox News senior congressional correspondent Chad Pergram reports on senators preparing to resume talks over the border crisis following the holiday recess. Let’s game out a potential agreement on border security. There was the Christmas rush to try securing a deal before the holiday. The plan was to link an immigration accord to a massive international aid package for Israel and Ukraine requested by President Biden. The Senate stuck around Washington for a few extra days before Christmas. Talks even ran through one weekend in mid-December. Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y., partially delayed the Senate’s holiday recess to maintain momentum in the talks. However, few senators thought much of the effort. A meager 61 senators surfaced on the evening of Dec. 18 for a vote to confirm former Maryland Gov. Martin O’Malley as the Social Security Administration Commissioner. It was the sparest attendance for any Senate vote since 56 senators cast ballots on an appropriations bill on May 28, 1959. BIDEN HAS ANOTHER CALAMITOUS YEAR AT THE SOUTHERN BORDER IN 2023 AS RECORDS SHATTER In an aerial view, thousands of immigrants, most wearing thermal blankets, await processing at a U.S. Border Patrol transit center on Dec. 19, 2023 in Eagle Pass, Texas. Major surges of migrants illegally crossing the Rio Grande have overwhelmed U.S. border authorities in recent weeks. (John Moore) The 1959 tally was only rivaled by a scant 54 senators who showed up to vote on May 5, 1960. The issue at hand was more like the issue "afoot": duties the government levied on lathes used to make shoes. The Senate voted to give the duties the boot. Border security talks are taking so long that senators may well burn through a few pairs of shoes before they strike a deal. Even though attendance was thin last week, Senate negotiators plodded ahead. Dropping things for the holidays would likely have cost the process momentum, such as it was. Maintaining any modicum of momentum is paramount if you consider the difficult path ahead for a border security/supplemental spending package. Talks resumed this week, remotely. One source signaled to Fox News that the negotiators might meet in person before Congress reconvenes on Jan. 8, if it is believed that face-to-face negotiations would help. In fact, Fox was told it is entirely possible the sides cannot even reach an agreement until the week of Jan. 8. Of course, it remains to be seen whether they can get a deal at all.MENENDEZ BLOCKS 2 BIDEN NOMINEES OVER FRUSTRATION WITH BORDER NEGOTIATIONS Let’s consider a middle-of-the-road scenario here. Imagine the sides reach a handshake agreement late next week, before Congress returns to session. At a minimum, it will take congressional legislative counsel a week or so to actually write the very complex, intricate changes to border and immigration policy. So that gets us toward the end of the first full week of January before the bill text is ready. Migrants depart from Tapachula, Mexico, Sunday, Dec. 24, 2023. The caravan started the trek north through Mexico just days before U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken arrives in Mexico City to discuss new agreements to control the surge of migrants seeking entry into the United States. (Edgar H. Clemente)All the while, interest groups and factions in Congress will inevitably start to chip away at this provision or that one after details of the agreement begin to dribble out. You can anticipate that opposition from both parties could be fierce to any proposal as controversial and complicated as immigration. That is why even a deal may be far from a true agreement. So this could drift until mid-January for the Senate to begin to process this proposal — even working on an expedited timetable. However, even if things go swimmingly, there is no guarantee the Senate can move quickly. Sixty votes are necessary to extinguish filibusters to both start debate and close debate on the bill. So bet on the Senate spending at least a week-and-a-half on this measure — even on a fast track.However, what we neglected in this narrative is the realpolitik of January and February on Capitol Hill.The first two months of the year might qualify as a parliamentary Superfund site. For starters, the government could run out of money on Jan. 19. Even if lawmakers limp along past that deadline and avoid a government shutdown, they will get a second crack at it on Feb. 2. The U.S. Capitol is seen lit by the morning sun. (Bill Clark) Yes. Groundhog Day. You cannot make this stuff up. No Punxsutawney Phil, here. We’ll see if "Louisiana Mike" and "Brooklyn Chuck" can pull a marmot out of their hat to avert a shutdown. Otherwise, look for clues. If they see their shadows, the government may operate for six weeks on a Continuing Resolution. If they don’t see their shadows, the stopgap bill may only last for four. You think this is daft? Considering the perils of Congressional prognostication, you could do worse than relying on a soothsaying rodent from central Pennsylvania. The potential of a government shutdown will consume everything on Capitol Hill. Of course, some longtime Capitol Hill observers might suggest that they Velcro the border security/supplemental aid package onto one of the spending bills. House Speaker Mike Johnson, R-La., argued against that. But you never know, when you consider how few legislative trains might depart from the Congressional station early next year. The House will also delve into a potential impeachment of the president. That will demand significant oxygen on Capitol Hill. The House will likely hold a vote to hold Hunter Biden in contempt of Congress for failing to appear for a deposition before the Oversight Committee. Lawmakers still haven’t sorted out a potential plan to reform the foreign surveillance program commonly known as FISA. The House will also delve into a potential impeachment of President Biden. (Kevin Lamarque) Any and all of this could sidetrack efforts to finish the border/supplemental package. And that’s if there’s ever a deal.So, don’t bank on a vote right away in January. In fact, a Senate vote could come in late January or beyond. Then, on to the House. And that is a complete wild card.Fox is told that Johnson understands that Israel and Ukraine need aid and can’t wait too long for that to materialize. But advancing any sort of immigration package through the House which deviates from the strict border security plan Republicans approved in the spring (known as "HR 2") is going to be a monster. Johnson still has goodwill among House Republicans. But he doesn’t have much political capital. That account will dwindle even further — hinging on what Johnson decides to do about government funding. Remember that it’s far from clear what if anything the House can do to actually fund the government. So political problems for Johnson could impede passage of any border security/supplemental plan. That’s to say nothing of problems on the Democratic side of the aisle. Fox News is told that House Speaker Mike Johnson understands that Israel and Ukraine need aid and cannot wait too long for that to materialize. (Tom Williams)As much as there are many Republicans who won’t vote for any immigration plan, there are likely just as many Democrats who will oppose what’s framed as "border security." Liberals will watch to see what changes are made to parole and asylum. Potential migration limits could be problematic. And then there are enforcement questions. Now you see how this could easily slip into February. And frankly, it may go deeper into the new year if a government shutdown or impeachment capsizes the Congress. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP So, no one truly thought there was any realistic chance of moving any sort of border security/supplemental spending package in December, despite the rush. And it may be rushing things to try to complete this by February or March. Chad Pergram currently serves as a senior congressional correspondent for FOX News Channel (FNC). He joined the network in September 2007 and is based out of Washington, D.C.
Fox News Flash top headlines for November 27 Fox News Flash top headlines are here. Check out what's clicking on Foxnews.com. In New York, migrants at a city-run shelter grumble that relatives who settled before them refuse to offer a bed. In Chicago, a provider of mental health services to people in the country illegally pivoted to new arrivals sleeping at a police station across the street. In South Florida, some immigrants complain that people who came later get work permits that are out of reach for them. Across the country, mayors, governors and others have been forceful advocates for newly arrived migrants seeking shelter and work permits. Their efforts and existing laws have exposed tensions among immigrants who have been in the country for years, even decades, and don't have the same benefits, notably work permits. And some new arrivals feel established immigrants have given them cold shoulders.Thousands of immigrants marched this month in Washington to ask that President Joe Biden extend work authorization to longtime residents as well. Signs read, "Work permits for all!" and "I have been waiting 34 years for a permit." NYC RESIDENTS PROTEST ON STATEN ISLAND AS MIGRANT CRISIS WORSENS, CLAIM THEY ARE 'NOT BEING VETTED': REPORT Immigrants who have been in the U.S. for years, rally asking for work permits for Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals and Temporary Protected Status programs at Franklin Park in Washington on Nov. 14, 2023. (AP Photo/Jose Luis Magana) CHICAGO MEETING TURNS UGLY AS RESIDENTS PROTEST PLANNED MIGRANT CAMP IN LOCAL NEIGHBORHOOD: 'NOBODY ASKED US' Despite a brief lull when new asylum restrictions took effect in May, arrests for illegal border crossings from Mexico topped 2 million for the second year in a row in the government’s budget year ending Sept. 30. Additionally, hundreds of thousands of migrants have been legally admitted to the country over the last year under new policies aimed at discouraging illegal crossings."The growing wave of arrivals make our immigration advocacy more challenging. Their arrival has created some tensions, some questioning," said U.S. Rep. Jesus "Chuy" Garcia, a Chicago Democrat whose largely Latino district includes a large immigrant population. People have been "waiting for decades for an opportunity to get a green card to legalize and have a pathway to citizenship." Asylum-seekers must wait six months for work authorization. Processing takes no more than 1.5 months for 80% of applicants, according to U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services.Those who cross the border on the Biden administration's new legal pathways have no required waiting period at all. Under temporary legal status known as parole, 270,000 people from Cuba, Haiti, Nicaragua and Venezuela arrived through October by applying online with a financial sponsor. Another 324,000 got appointments to enter at a land crossing with Mexico by using a mobile app called CBP One. The administration said in September that it would work to reduce wait times for work permits to 30 days for those using the new pathways. By late September, it had blasted 1.4 million emails and texts reminding who was eligible to work. José Guerrero, who worked in construction after arriving 27 years ago from Mexico, acknowledged many new arrivals felt compelled to flee their countries. He says he wants the same treatment."All these immigrants come and they give them everything so easily, and nothing to us that have been working for years and paying taxes," Guerrero, now a landscaper in Homestead, Florida, about 39 miles south of Miami. "They give these people everything in their hands."The White House is asking Congress for $1.4 billion for food, shelter and other services for new arrivals. The mayors of New York, Denver, Chicago, Los Angeles and Houston wrote President Joe Biden last month to seek $5 billion, noting the influx has drained budgets and cut essential services. The mayors also support temporary status — and work permits — for people who have been in the U.S. longer but have focused on new arrivals."All of the newcomers arriving in our cities are looking for the chance to work, and every day we get calls from business leaders who have unfilled jobs and want to hire these newcomers," the mayors wrote. "We can successfully welcome and integrate these newcomers and help them pursue the American Dream if they have a chance to work."Many new arrivals are indisputably in dire circumstances, including some who hoped to join relatives and friends but find their calls blocked and messages unreturned. Angel Hernandez, a Venezuelan who walked through Panama’s notorious Darien Gap rainforest, where he witnessed corpses, was sorely disappointed when he reached New York. The construction worker said he and his aunt, uncle and their two children left Colombia after more than three years because work dried up. Hernandez, 20, planned to settle with his uncle’s brother, who settled in the United States about a year earlier and lives in a house with a steady job. His job search has been fruitless."Everyone is out for themselves," he said outside the Roosevelt Hotel, a Midtown Manhattan property that was closed until the city opened it for migrants in May. The influx has put many immigrant services groups in a financial bind.For decades, the Latino Treatment Center has provided help with drug abuse to many immigrants living in Chicago without legal status. It started helping new arrivals sleeping at the police station across the street, fixing a shower in the office for migrants to use a few days a week and offering counseling. "It is such a unique situation that we weren’t set up for," said Adriana Trino, the group’s executive director. "This has been a whole different wheelhouse, the needs are so different." Many organizations deny friction and say they have been able to make ends meet."We're trying to keep a balance of doing both — people who have been here for years and people who are arriving, and so far we have been able to serve everybody," said Diego Torres of the Latin American Coalition, which assists immigrants in Charlotte, North Carolina. In Atlanta, the Latin American Association says it has spent $50,000 this year on temporary housing and other aid for new arrivals. Santiago Marquez, the organization’s chief executive, hasn't sensed resentment. VIOLENCE ERUPTS AMONG PROTESTING GROUPS OUTSIDE NEW YORK CITY MAYOR’S HOME AS MIGRANT CRISIS HITS FEVER PITCH"Our core clients – most of them are immigrants – they understand the plight," he said. "They’ve gone through it. They understand."Still, it's easy to find immigrants with deep roots in the United States who chafe about unequal treatment. A 45-year-old Mexican woman who came to the United States 25 years ago and has three U.S.-born children said it was unfair that new arrivals get work permits over her. She earns $150 a week picking sweet potatoes in Homestead. "For a humanitarian reason, they are giving opportunities to those who are arriving, and what is the humanity with us?" said the woman, who asked that she be identified by her last name only, Hernandez, because she fears being deported.The Washington rally reflected an effort by advocates to push for work permits for all, regardless of when they came. "It is a system that has strained our city and, at this moment, it brings conflict between neighbors." Lawrence Benito, head of the Illinois Coalition for Immigrant and Refugee Rights, said at a Chicago rally last month.
Shocking video shows cartels hurling explosives near border Former acting DHS Secretary Chad Wolf reacts to the latest news from the southern border as concerns of terrorism rise Rep. Ryan Zinke, R-Mont., is pushing Congress to shut down all Palestinian immigration into the U.S. with legislation that he says is "very hard and harsh" amid ongoing concerns about vetting migrants for potential ties to terrorism following Hamas' October attack against Israel. Zinke’s Safeguarding Americans from Extremism (SAFE) Act would target any foreign national with a Palestinian Authority (PA) passport or PA-granted travel document, making them inadmissible to the United States.Additionally, it would bar the Department of Homeland Security from granting green cards and temporary or "nonimmigrant" visas to PA passport holders and would revoke visas issued to those covered after October 1. ICE ARRESTS AFRICAN ILLEGAL IMMIGRANT, WANTED IN SENEGAL FOR TERRORIST OFFENSES, WHO WAS RELEASED INTO US The measure would block DHS from granting Temporary Protected Status, asylum or refugee status to PA passport holders, and it would revoke those statuses to anyone with passports if it granted this fiscal year. "This bill looks and is a very, very hard and harsh bill. Absolutely. And I said from the very, very beginning. I don't think you'll find a more stringent bill on the Gaza region than this," he said. "What has drawn us to this is that this administration has failed in every previous encounter to vet who has come in this country."The bill is co-sponsored by Reps. Andy Harris, R-Md., Aaron Bean, R-Fla., Ralph Norman, R-S.C., Scott DesJarlais, R-Tenn., Clay Higgins, R-La., Ronny Jackson, R-Texas, Bill Posey, R-Fla., Barry Moore, R-Ala., Marjorie Taylor Greene R-Ga., and Andy Biggs, R-Ariz. It’s a step further than legislation and calls by other Republicans — including on the campaign trail — where candidates have called only for a block on refugees coming into the U.S. and also the revocation of visas of Hamas supporters.GRASSLEY SOUNDS ALARM ON POTENTIAL DRONE THREAT AT SOUTHERN BORDER AMID HAMAS TERROR CONCERNS Rep. Ryan Zinke. (Tom Williams/CQ-Roll Call, Inc via Getty Images) "I think this is the most stringent anti-Gaza anti-Hamas immigration refugee bill ever, and I can tell you this administration is deserving of it, because, to date, I haven't seen them screen anybody," he said. There has been renewed scrutiny of the potential connection between immigration and terrorism since Hamas’ attack on Israel. Republicans have noted increased encounters of people on the terror watch list at the southern border.MAYORKAS CONFIRMS OVER 600,000 ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS EVADED LAW ENFORCEMENT AT SOUTHERN BORDER LAST FISCAL YEARCBS News reported this week that a 20-year-old Jordanian man in Texas, who is accused of training with weapons to commit an attack, traveled to the U.S. on a Palestinian passport at one point. DHS has stressed that it has "multilayered border security efforts," including screening and vetting, and has also said that encounters of known or suspected terrorists are uncommon. Recently, Customs and Border Protection (CBP) warned in an internal memo of the possibility that foreign fighters from Hamas, Hezbollah and Palestinian Jihad may try to enter the U.S. — although the agency says it has seen no indications of fighters trying to do so. VideoZinke also cited concerns about the vetting of more than 70,000 Afghans brought into the U.S. after the 2021 withdrawal — concerns the administration has challenged — and says that the vetting of both the PA and the Biden administration cannot be trusted. CLICK TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP "I say enough's enough," he said.He stressed, however, that he doesn’t have anything against Palestinians, and that this is about the ability to vet people. "I don't have any hard feelings towards the Palestinian people, but where we are is that this administration, given the population of what's occurred and the horrific acts that were done, we need to look at it as almost a pandemic and stop it from spreading. And this administration, again, it has shown that they're incapable of vetting." Adam Shaw is a politics reporter for Fox News Digital, primarily covering immigration and border security.He can be reached at adam.shaw2@fox.com or on Twitter.
Trump calls to ban people who want to 'abolish Israel' from entering America: 'not going to get in' Former President Trump called to ban people who believe Israel should be abolished from entering America. Former President Trump said people who want to abolish Israel shouldn't be allowed to enter America. Trump made the comments during the Florida Freedom Summit on Saturday, where other 2024 GOP presidential contenders also spoke, including Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis, Sen. Tim Scott, North Dakota Gov. Doug Burgum, former Arkansas Gov. Asa Hutchinson, former New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie and Vivek Ramaswamy."If you hate America, if you want to abolish Israel, if you sympathize with jihadists, and then you don't want your country to do well, you don't want your country to be successful, you're just not going to get in, you're not getting in, you're not coming into our country," Tump said. Trump also proposed ideological screening for immigrants. ACLU BACKS TRUMP IN FIGHT AGAINST DC JUDGE'S GAG ORDER Republican presidential candidate former U.S. President Donald Trump speaks during the Florida Freedom Summit at the Gaylord Palms Resort on November 04, 2023 in Kissimmee, Florida. The Republican Party of Florida hosted the summit as candidates continue to campaign across the country. (Photo by Joe Raedle/Getty Images) "On day one, I will restore the Trump travel on entering from having people that like to blow up our shopping centers and kill our people and do lots of bad things. Entry from plagued countries. We will not allow people to come in and will implement strong ideological screening for all immigrants," Trump said. Trump called for ideological screening for immigrants during his 2016 campaign as well, stating that "extreme vetting" needs to be in place. NEW YORK JUDGE FINES TRUMP $10K FOR VIOLATING PARTIAL GAG ORDER IN CIVIL FRAUD TRIAL Former US President Donald Trump speaks to members of the media at New York State Supreme Court in New York, US, on Wednesday, Oct. 25, 2023. (Stephanie Keith/Bloomberg via Getty Images)"We should only admit into this country those who share our values and respect our people," Trump said in 2016. "The time is overdue to develop a new screening test for the threats we face today." Trump's comments come after he promised to deport immigrants who are publicly supporting Hamas during an Iowa campaign speech Oct. 16. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Alina Habba, attorney for former President Donald Trump, left of center, Former US President Donald Trump, center, and Chris Kise, attorney for former President Donald Trump, right of center, at New York State Supreme Court in New York, US, on Wednesday, Oct. 4, 2023. (Michael Nagle/Bloomberg via Getty Images)"We aren’t bringing in anyone from Gaza," Trump also said at the event.Reuters and Fox News Digital's Adam Shaw contributed to this report. Adam Sabes is a writer for Fox News Digital. Story tips can be sent to Adam.Sabes@fox.com and on Twitter @asabes10.
Texans ‘took matters into their own hands’ in response to Biden admin’s border ‘failure’: Texas Rep. Texas Republican state Rep. David Spiller tells ‘FOX & Friends Weekend’ to discuss the three bills designed to beef up border security and expand police power to deport illegal immigrants. Border Patrol released over 900,000 illegal immigrants into the interior of the United States in Fiscal Year 2023, including more than 150,000 in September alone — offering an insight into how many migrants who crossed the border illegally are allowed to stay in the country. The data on the Customs and Border Protection (CBP) website shows that 908,669 migrants were released by Border Patrol in FY 2023 after being encountered between ports of entry having crossed illegally. The figures do not include ICE releases or those encountered at ports of entry. Those released were primarily given a NTA/OR (notice to appear on own recognizance), meaning they were released into the U.S. with instructions to appear in court, often at a date years in the future. A minority were released under humanitarian parole between October 2022 and January 2023. In September, there were 155,914 migrants released into the U.S. by Border Patrol alone with NTAs. For context, there were 218,763 migrants encountered by Border Patrol agents in September, meaning the majority of those encountered between ports of entry were released into the U.S. WHITE HOUSE FUNDING REQUEST INCLUDES $14 BILLION FOR BORDER AS CRISIS HITS NEW RECORDS In an aerial view, migrants are seen grouped together while waiting to be processed on the Ciudad Juarez side of the border on September 21, 2023, in El Paso, Texas. (Photo by Brandon Bell/Getty Images) For the entire fiscal year, 900,000 Border Patrol releases is a population size larger than several U.S. states, including Wyoming, Vermont, Alaska and North and South Dakota. There were just over two million encounters by Border Patrol in FY 2023.Overall, including ports of entry, there were 269,000 encounters in September — a historic high that took FY 23 to a new record with more than 2.4 million encounters. At the ports of entry, there were also over 350,000 NTAs issued. The Biden administration recently called on Congress to provide an additional $14 billion in funding for border operations, including for processing, support for states and communities into which migrants have been released, and additional agents. The White House says the money includes funding for transportation, including removal flights and resources for alternatives to detention. It also includes money for "non-custodial housing options" for those in expedited removal, including facilities with housing, legal services and medical care. HIGH MIGRANT NUMBERS BREAK MULTIPLE RECORDS IN NEW BLOW TO BIDEN BORDER STRATEGY The administration has said repeatedly that Congress needs to provide additional funding and pass legislation to fix a "broken" immigration system — pointing in particular to a 2021 package of legislation that would have included a pathway to citizenship for millions of illegal immigrants already in the U.S. It has also emphasized its expansion of lawful migration pathways. The Border Patrol data does not include migrants released into the U.S. via those programs, including the CBP One app and the Cuban, Haitian, Nicaraguan and Venezuelan (CHNV) parole program. "At this time of unprecedented hemispheric and global challenges, we must come together to strengthen our ability to protect the American people. I strongly urge Congress to give the men and women of DHS the resources and support they need to achieve our safety and security mission," DHS Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas said in a statement accompanying the funding request.Republicans have passed their own legislation in the House which would increase border security, including wall construction, and limit asylum and parole releases. They have blamed the Biden administration’s policies, including reduced interior enforcement and releases of migrants, for fueling the crisis. Brandon Judd, the president of the National Border Patrol Council, pointed to the CBP numbers as an explanation for why the southern border "is out of control." Video"As long as Biden rewards illegal border crossers with a release into the United States, people will continue to come. And while all agents I am proud to associate with believe in protecting the innocent, to classify all these releases as humanitarian is a lie," he said. "We are overwhelmed and do not have the resources to properly vet and classify those we arrest. As long as we fail to properly enforce our immigration laws, the border will remain out of control," he said. Others called on Republicans in Congress, now armed with a new speaker in the House, to take action. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP "The numbers are clear — the Biden administration has released more illegal aliens into American communities than any other year, many of whom were not detained, placed into electronic monitoring, or even issued an actual court date," RJ Hauman, president of the National Immigration Center for Enforcement (NICE), told Fox News Digital. "When will Congress wake up and end this deliberate ‘welcome and release’ chaos?" Adam Shaw is a politics reporter for Fox News Digital, primarily covering immigration and border security.He can be reached at adam.shaw2@fox.com or on Twitter.
